doi :10.1016 / j.jmb .2005.03.024 
netic Molecular Analysis o B age- en ode pe III-secreted S bstrate n Salm nella enterica Serovar Typhimurium with Autono s Expression from its Associated P e
and 
Ge 
f Gog , a Ph 
d Ty 
c 
u 
i 
o 
mou 
hag 
Brian K. Coombes1 , Mark E. Wickham1 , Nat . 
F. Brown1 Sebastien Lemire2 , Lionello Bossi2 , William W. L. Hsiao3 Fiona S. L. Brinkman3 and B. Brett Finlay1 ,4,5 * 
1 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium is lysogenized by several temperate bacteriophages that encode lysogenic conversion genes , which can act as virulence factors during infection and contribute to the genetic diversity and pathogenic potential of the lysogen . 
We have investigated the temperate bacteriophage called Gifsy-1 in S. enterica serovar Typhimurium and show here that the product of the gogB gene encoded within this phage shares similarity with proteins from other Gram-negative pathogens . 
The amino-terminal portion of GogB shares similarity with leucine-rich repeat-containing virulence-associated proteins from other Gram-negative pathogens , whereas the carboxyl-terminal portion of GogB shares similarity with uncharacterized proteins in other pathogens . 
We show that GogB is secreted by both type III secretion systems encoded in Salmonella Pathogenicity Island-1 ( SPI-1 ) and SPI-2 but translocation into host cells is a SPI-2-mediated process . 
Once translocated , GogB localizes to the cytoplasm of infected host cells . 
The genetic regulation of gogB in Salmonella is inﬂuenced by the transcriptional activator , SsrB , under SPI-2-inducing conditions , but the modular nature of the gogB gene allows for autonomous expression and type III secretion following horizontal gene transfer into a heterologous pathogen . 
These data deﬁne the ﬁrst autonomously expressed lysogenic conversion gene within Gifsy-1 that acts as a modular and promiscuous type III-secreted substrate of the infection process . 
Michael Smith Laboratories University of British Columbia Vancouver , BC , Canada V6T 1Z3 2 Centre de Génétique Moléculaire , Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque 91198 France 3 Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry Simon Fraser University Burnaby , BC , Canada V5A 1S6 4 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of British Columbia Vancouver , BC , Canada V6T 1Z3 5 Department of Microbiology and Immunology , University of British Columbia , Vancouver BC , Canada V6T 1Z3 
q 2005 Elsevier Ltd. . 
All rights reserved . 
Keywords : Salmonella ; Gifsy ; lambdoid phage ; GogB ; type III secretion 
* Corresponding author 
Introduction
Salmonella enterica are facultative intracellular Gram-negative bacteria that are important enteric pathogens for humans and commercial livestock . 
Infection with these organisms causes a self-limit-ing enterocolitis that can progress to a serious systemic disease in ruminants and humans called 
Abbreviations used : SPI-1 , Salmonella Pathogenicity Island-1 ; SARC11 , Salmonella Reference Collection C-11 ; LRR , leucine-rich repeat ; HMM , hidden Markov model ; LEE , locus of enterocyte effacement ; FRT , FLP recognition target ; RLU , relative light units . 
E-mail address of the corresponding author : bﬁnlay@interchange.ubc.ca enteric fever . 
The infecting S. enterica serovar and the host species inﬂuence systemic disease progression . 
For example , serovar Typhi is a human host-restricted pathogen , whereas serovar Typhi-murium exhibits a wide host range including humans , mice , cattle and chickens . 
Two major virulence determinants that contribute to Salmonella pathogenesis are encoded in separate chromosomal pathogenicity islands called Salmonella Patho-genicity Island : SPI-1 and SPI-2 . 
Each encodes a 1 2,3 suite of molecules that assemble into a type III secretion system that can translocate effector proteins directly from the bacterial cell into target host cells . 
Effector proteins translocated by the SPI-1 type III secretion system inﬂuence early cyto-skeletal and membrane rearrangements involved in bacterial uptake into target cells , whereas SPI-2 4 is generally thought to play a role during intracellular infection by allowing the formation of Salmonella replicative vacuoles and avoiding host cell defences . 
The effector protein repertoire of 5 Salmonella is comprised of proteins encoded within the SPI-1 and SPI-2 virulence loci , as well as in other regions of the chromosome . 
Effector genes are usually contained within or are in close proximity to mobile genetic elements such as insertion sequences , lysogenic phage and prophage remnants , suggesting acquisition by horizontal gene transfer . 
Horizontal gene transfer has strongly inﬂuenced the evolution of bacterial pathogenesis . 
In particu-6 lar , the acquisition of virulence genes via bacteriophages , a process called lysogenic conversion , facilitates the evolution of more virulent bacterial strains and has strongly inﬂuenced the genetic 7 diversity and pathogenic potential of Salmonella . 
8 -- 11 The repertoire of lysogenic phage found in different Salmonella strains is variable within the Typhi-murium serovar . 
For example , S. enterica serovar Typhimurium strain 14028s contains the active Gifsy-3 phage , whereas LT2 and SL1344 strains , although susceptible to Gifsy-3 infection , are not Gifsy-3 lysogens . 
Strain SL1344 carries an 11 additional phage sopEF , which is not found in 12 14028s , and encodes a type III-secreted nucleotide exchange factor for host cellular Rho GTPases ( SopE ) involved in bacterial invasion . 
Two other 13 lambdoid phages , Gifsy-1 and Gifsy-2 , are present in most S. enterica serovar Typhimurium strains studied . 
Several lysogenic conversion genes 14 within these and other phage appear to be type III secretion-dependent translocated effectors during infection , including the SPI-1 effectors SopE2 15,16 and SspH1 and the SPI-2 effectors SspH2 and 17 17 SseI ( also known as GtgB/SrfH ) . 
18 Some virulence-associated factors have been identiﬁed in the Gifsy phage family , although most of these proteins appear to be non-secreted proteins ( with the exception of SseI in Gifsy-2 and SspH1 in Gifsy-3 ) involved in improving bacterial ﬁtness . 
Within Gifsy-2 , at least three non-secreted virulence factors have been described , including GtgE , required for full virulence of Salmonella 19 strains lysogenized by Gifsy-2 ; GrvA , described as 20 an `` antivirulence '' gene because a gvrA mutant is more virulent in mice than the wild-type strain ; and SodCI , a periplasmic copper/zinc superoxide 21 -- 23 dismutase that protects Salmonella lysogens from the oxidative burst , probably during systemic colonization of the reticuloendothelial system . 
One gene in Gifsy-1 , gipA , has been described as a virulence gene required for Salmonella replication in Peyer 's patches of the mouse intestine , although 24 the exact function of this protein ( also present in S. bongori strain S4410 and Salmonella Reference Collection C-11 ( SARC11 ) ) during infection has 25 not been identiﬁed . 
Virulence studies of Salmonella strains cured of Gifsy-1 , Gifsy-2 , or both lysogenic phage revealed that Gifsy-2 plays a major role in Salmonella virulence in mice , most likely by the 26 contribution of SodCI and GtgE . 
Gifsy-2-cured 11,22 19 strains are signiﬁcantly impaired in their ability to establish a systemic infection in mice while curing Gifsy-1 attenuates virulence only in the absence of Gifsy-2 suggesting that Gifsy-2 might encode a protein ( s ) with similar function to that in Gifsy-1 . 
26 GogB is a Gifsy-1-encoded protein with a similar N terminus to a group of leucine-rich repeat ( LRR ) - containing proteins from other pathogens . 
Here , 11 we analysed the amino acid sequence of GogB and show that it also shares similarity with the carboxylterminal domain of a second group of proteins found in enteric pathogens . 
Further , we demonstrate that GogB is a secreted substrate of both the SPI-1 and SPI-2 type III secretion systems in Salmonella and that SPI-2 translocates GogB to the host cytoplasm during infection . 
Finally , we demonstrate that gogB exists as a genetic module with autonomous expression and type III secretion with respect to other Gifsy phage elements in Salmonella , a feature that can be fully recapitulated following horizontal transfer to another pathogen with a type III secretion system . 
0022-2836 / $ - see front matter q 2005 Elsevier Ltd. . 
All rights reserved 
Results
GogB homologues fall into two distinct groups including virulence factors and uncharacterised proteins 
GogB is the ﬁrst ORF located in the Gifsy-1 prophage in S. enterica serovar Typhimurium ( Figure 1 ( a ) and ( b ) ) . 
We analysed the primary amino acid sequence of GogB and found that it contains a partial leucine-rich repeat ( LRR ) domain at the N terminus , as predicted and deﬁned here 11 ( Figure 1 ( c ) ) . 
A consensus LRR domain from three type III-secreted virulence proteins of bacterial pathogens , including SspH2 and SlrP from Salmonella and YopM from Yersinia , was deﬁned using a hidden Markov model ( HMM ) and used to compare the LRR domain of GogB . 
The domain HMM predicted GogB to contain two partial LRRs at amino acid residues 91 -- 136 and 172 -- 217 with periodic repetitions of leucine residues at every sixth or seventh position ( Figure 1 ( c ) ) . 
The primary amino acid sequence of GogB was then used to search databases for homologous proteins . 
A group of proteins was identiﬁed sharing similarity with GogB that was restricted entirely to the amino-terminal domain containing the LRR region ( Figure 2 ( a ) and Table 1 ) as predicted for YopM . 
Yersinia 11 YopM is secreted by the ysc type III secretion system in Y. enterocolitica , and IpaH7 .8 and IpaH9 .8 27 28 29 are encoded on the invasion plasmid and are delivered to host cells by the Shigella Mxi/Spa type III secretion system . 
Yersinia Y3399 is a secreted protein of unknown function ( Table 1 ) . 
Interestingly , the amino-terminal LRR domain of GogB also shares 36 % amino acid identity ( 29/80 amino acid residues ) with another SPI-2-secreted effector in Salmonella called SspH2 , encoded in a phag 17 remnant in some strains of serovar Typhimurium . 
The similarity between these two proteins is limited to amino acid residues 64 -- 143 of GogB and amino acid residues 246 -- 321 of SspH2 . 
A second secreted protein called SspH1 also shares 29 % identity 17 ( 32/108 amino acid residues ) with GogB in the LRR region ( amino acid residues 61 -- 151 of GogB and amino acid residues 217 -- 324 of SspH1 ) . 
Strain 14028s releases a lambdoid phage , named Gifsy-3 , which harbours the sspH1 gene . 
Despite its 11 similarity to SspH1 and SspH2 , GogB lacks the canonical N-terminal WEK ( I/M ) XXFF amino acid motif common to some SPI-2 type III-secreted proteins that is thought to function as a SPI-2 18,30 type III secretion signal in Salmonella . 
Upon further examination of the homology data , we identiﬁed a second group of proteins bearing signiﬁcant similarity to GogB predominantly at the carboxyl-terminal domain downstream of the LRR region ( Figure 2 ( b ) and Table 1 ) , which were not previously identiﬁed in homology searches . 
Interestingly , none of these proteins are characterized a virulence factors or deﬁned as type III secretion system substrates . 
One of these proteins , Z1829 , is encoded by a cryptic prophage designated CP-933N in EHEC O157 : H7 indicating that it was likely 31 acquired by phage-mediated horizontal gene transfer . 
OrfL from rabbit enteropathogenic Escherichia coli is encoded adjacent to the locus of enterocyte effacement ( LEE ) , the pathogenicity island containing the genetic elements required for type III secretion in attaching and effacing pathogens . 
Figure 1 . 
Chromosomal organization of Salmonella prophages and genetic organization of the Gifsy-1 lysogen . 
( a ) The chromosomal location of four prophages ( Gifsy-1 , Gifsy-2 , Fels-1 Fels-2 ) in Salmonella and two prophage remnants with their associated lysogenic conversion genes indicated . 
The location of SPI-1 and SPI-2 is indicated in red . 
( b ) Scaled genetic organizational map of Gifsy-1 and location of gogB . 
Nucleotide positions are indicated above the genetic map . 
The Gifsy-1 prophage map is oriented according to increasing centisome units , therefore gogB appears on the left-end of the map and the lambdoid int-xis region is oriented to the right-end of the map . 
( c ) Alignment of the GogB N-terminal leucine-rich repeat region with a HMM LRR domain . 
Two predicted LRRs are shown and amino acid positions are indicated to the left of each sequence string . 
Figure 2 ( legend opposite ) 
GogB is secreted by both the SPI-1 and SPI-2- encoded type III secretion systems
Due to sequence similarity to secreted virulence factors we hypothesized that GogB could be a substrate for the type III secretion system ( s ) in Salmonella . 
In addition , the lack of a predicted N-terminal signal peptide suggested that GogB might have a signal peptide-independent secretion mechanism , such as type III . 
To test this hypothesis , we expressed epitope-tagged GogB in wild-type Salmonella , an SPI-1 apparatus mutant ( invATKan ) , and an SPI-2 apparatus mutant ( DssaR ) and tested whole bacterial cell lysates and secreted protein fractions for the presence of GogB-HA under various growth conditions . 
During growth in LB , expression and secretion of GogB-HA was not different in the different strain backgrounds tested except for the invATKan mutant in which secretion of GogB-HA was slightly lower compared to wildtype bacteria ( Figure 3 ( a ) ) . 
During growth in a minimal medium ( LPM ) previously shown t induce the expression of SPI-2 virulence genes , 32 -- 34 secretion of GogB-HA was reduced , but not completely eliminated , in the single SPI-2 apparatus mutant ( DssaR ) and in the single SPI-1 apparatus mutant ( invATKan ) ( Figure 3 ( a ) ) . 
We also tested whether a DssaL strain , shown previously to limit secretion of SPI-2 translocon components but not SPI-2 effectors encoded outside of SPI-2 was 32 capable of secreting GogB in vitro . 
As shown in Figure 3 ( a ) , the DssaL strain expressed and secreted equivalent amounts of GogB compared to wild-type bacteria . 
Since neither of the single type III apparatus mutants could completely restrict GogB secretion , we hypothesized that GogB could be a substrate for both the SPI-1 and SPI-2 virulenceassociated type III secretion systems in Salmonella 
Figure 2 . 
GogB shares similarity with two distinct families of pathogen-associated proteins . 
( a ) Amino-terminal similarity class . 
Amino acid sequence alignment of GogB , Yersinia Y3399 and YopM , and two Shigella ﬂexneri proteins , IpaH7 .8 and IpaH9 .8 . 
Identical residues are highlighted in red boxes . 
( b ) Carboxyl-terminal similarity class . 
Amino acid sequence alignment of GogB , two Yersinia petis proteins ( YP2634 and Y1471 ) , OrfL from rabbit enteropathogenic E. coli and Z1829 from human enterohemorrhagic E. coli O157 : H7 . 
Sequence alignments were performed using Clustalw ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw ) and formatted using ESPript v. 2.2 ( http://prodes.toulouse.inra.fr/ESPript/cgi-bin/ ESPript.cgi ) . 
Table 1 . 
Summary of amino acid homology between GogB and related proteins 
Homologous 
Type III substrate 
group % Identity 
% Similarity 
Amino terminal group 
39 ( 90/226 ) 45 ( 70/154 ) 56 ( 49/87 ) 40 ( 104/257 ) 45 ( 45/108 ) 55 ( 44/80 ) 
YopM 25 ( 58/226 ) IpaH7 .8 28 ( 44/154 ) IpaH9 .8 32 ( 28/87 ) Y3399 25 ( 65/257 ) SspH1 29 ( 32/108 ) SspH2 36 ( 29/80 ) Carboxyl terminal group Z1829 30 ( 134/439 ) OrfL 30 ( 140/454 ) Y1471 36 ( 120/330 ) YP2634 36 ( 120/330 ) 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
51 ( 226/439 ) 49 ( 225/454 ) 50 ( 166/330 ) 50 ( 166/330 ) 
Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown 
To examine this further , we constructed a double mutant lacking both SPI-1 and SPI-2-mediated type III secretion activity ( DssaR invATKan ) and examined the secretion of GogB-HA . 
Secretion of GogB-HA was completely eliminated in the double mutant ( Figure 3 ( b ) ) conﬁrming that GogB can be secreted by both of the virulence-associated type III secretion systems in Salmonella . 
GogB expression and secretion is autonomous with respect to other Gifsy prophage elements additional elements encoded within Gifsy-1 . 
To test this hypothesis , we transformed Gifsy-1-cured Salmonella with pgogB-HA and tested expression 26 and secretion under various conditions . 
The expression level of GogB-HA was not different in Gifsy-1 cured strains compared to wild-type bacteria ( Figure 3 ( a ) ) , indicating that GogB expression and type III secretion is independent of Gifsy-1 prophage genes 
Figure 3 . 
GogB is a type III-secreted substrate . 
( a ) The SPI-1 and SPI-2-encoded type III secretion system can secrete GogB-HA . 
Various Salmonella strains expressing GogB-HA were grown in LB ( top panel ) , or a minimal medium ( LPM ) at pH 7.0 ( middle panel ) or 5.8 ( bottom panel ) . 
Whole bacterial pellet fractions and secreted proteins from each culture were analyzed by Western blot for GogB-HA . 
P , whole bacterial pellet ; S , secreted protein fraction . 
( b ) A Salmonella mutant defective in both virulence-associated type III secretion systems does not secrete GogB-HA . 
Wild-type Salmonella and a SPI-1 and SPI-2 double mutant ( DssaR invATKan ) expressing GogBHA were grown in the indicated media and pellet fractions and secreted protein fractions were analyzed by Western blot for GogB-HA ( top panel ) and the bacterial cytoplasmic protein , DnaK ( bottom panel ) . 
Figure 4 . 
gogB expression is co-regulated with SPI-2 under SPI-2-inducing conditions . 
( a ) Western blot showing GogB-HA expression in various Salmonella strains and growth conditions . 
Wild-type Salmonella and a mutant defective for production of the SPI-2 two-component regulatory component , SsrB , were transformed with pgogB-HA and then grown under SPI-2-inducing conditions . 
Whole bacterial fractions ( P ) and secreted protein fractions ( S ) were analyzed for the presence of GogB-HA and DnaK . 
( b ) Wild-type Salmonella and a mutant defective for production of the SPI-1 activator , HilA , were transformed with pgogB-HA and then grown under SPI-1-inducing conditions ( see Materials and Methods ) . 
Whole bacterial lysates were analysed by Western blot for GogB-HA expression . 
( c ) b-Galactosidase activity assays . 
The activity of the gogB promoter was assessed with a transcriptional promoter fusion to lacZ on the Salmonella chromosome . 
Wild-type and ssrB mutant reporter strains were grown under SPI-2-inducing conditions and bgalactosidase activity was measured . 
Data are given as the mean relative light units ( RLU ) normalized to the optical density of the bacterial culture with standard errors . 
Expression of GogB by Salmonella may require 
Expression of GogB is reduced in an ssrB mutant background under SPI-2-inducing conditions 
Using a technique to epitope-tag chromosomal genes in Salmonella , it was reported that GogB expression was under the control of the SPI-2 two-component regulatory system , SsrA/SsrB . 
To 35 further test this transcriptional relationship under native conditions , we transformed an ssrB mutant Salmonella strain with pgogB-HA and tested expression levels under SPI-2-inducing conditions . 
GogB-HA expression was reduced in the ssrB mutant compared to wild-type Salmonella in minimal media at both neutral and acidic pH ( Figure 4 ( a ) ) , indicating that the gogB promoter is part of the SPI-2 regulon . 
Since expression of gogB was also evident under SPI-1 inducing conditions in LB , we tested whether this expression was dependent on the SPI-1 transcriptional activator , HilA . 
hilA mutant Salmonella expressed similar amounts of GogB compared to wild-type Salmonella ( Figure 4 ( b ) ) , indicating that an additional undeﬁned regulator ( s ) was responsible for gogB expression under SPI-1-inducing conditions . 
To verify the reduction in GogB expression seen in the ssrB mutant , we constructed a transcriptional fusion of the gogB promoter to lacZ on the Salmonella chromosome in both a wild-type and ssrB mutant background and performed b-galactosidase activity assays under SPI-2-inducing conditions . 
As shown in Figure 4 ( c ) , b-galactosidase activity was signiﬁcantly reduced in the ssrB mutant background compared to wild-type Salmonella ( p ! 
0.0001 ) , consistent with the protein expression data described above . 
Figure 5 . 
GogB is expressed during intracellular infection independently of other Gifsy-encoded phage genes . 
( a ) HeLa cells were infected with various Salmo-nella strains expressing GogB from its endogenous promoter . 
At 12 hours after infection , host cell lysates were examined for the presence of GogB ( upper panel ) and DnaK as a control for intracellular bacteria ( lower panel ) by Western blot . 
( b ) Kinetics of GogB expression during intracellular infection . 
Wild-type Salmonella expressing GogB from its native promoter were infected into HeLa cells for the times indicated in the Figure . 
Host cell lysates were generated at the indicated time points and examined for GogB-HA . 
DG-1 , Gifsy-1-cured Salmo-nella ; DG-1 / 2 , Gifsy-1 , Gifsy-2-cured Salmonella . 
GogB is expressed during intracellular infection 
To test whether GogB is expressed from intracellular Salmonella during infection , we infected HeLa cells with strains expressing epitope-tagged GogB and tested the infected cells for the presence of GogB-HA . 
As shown in Figure 5 ( a ) , GogB-HA was present in cells infected with wild-type Salmonella and in strains cured of Gifsy-1 or both Gifsy-1 and Gifsy-2 , conﬁrming that additional Gifsy-encoded elements are not required for expression of gogB from its native promoter in the intracellular environment . 
The intracellular expression of GogB-HA was completely eliminated in an ssrB mutant background , despite the fact that viable ssrB mutants were present in cells at the time points examined . 
These data indicated that during intracellular infection , GogB expression is intricately linked to the SPI-2 regulon . 
To examine the kinetics of GogB expression inside cells , we infected epithelial cells for various times and probed infected cells for GogB-HA . 
GogB-HA was ﬁrst detected at three hours after infection and increased thereafter until the experiment was stopped at 20 hours ( Figure 5 ( b ) ) . 
GogB-HA was likely not detected in the intracellular environment prior to three hours after infection due to the lower bacterial numbers inside cells than in pure cultures ( Figure 3 ) . 
These data indicated that GogB is expressed by intracellular Salmonella in a time frame consistent with the activation and secretion of SPI-2 virulence genes . 
GogB is translocated to the host cell cytosol by the SPI-2 type III secretion system during Salmonella infection 
To determine the cellular location of GogB expressed inside cells , we infected HeLa cells for 12 hours with wild-type Salmonella or a SPI-2 mutant , each expressing HA-tagged GogB and fractionated the host cells into a : ( i ) bacteria/cyto-skeleton/nuclei fraction , ( ii ) host membrane fraction and ( iii ) host cytoplasm fraction as described in Materials and Methods . 
Each fraction was probed for GogB and relevant control antibodies were used to verify the purity of each fraction . 
GogB was translocated into host cells where it localized to the host cell cytoplasmic fraction ( Figure 6 ( a ) ) . 
Cytoplasmic GogB was completely eliminated during infection with the DssaR strain despite the fact that these bacteria are able to actively invade epithelia cells and are competent for SPI-1-mediated type III secretion . 
These data indicated that translocation into the host cytosol was dependent on the SPI-2 type III secretion system . 
As a control for SPI-1-mediated type III secretion , we probed all host cell fractions with anti-SopB antiserum , which demonstrated that this SPI-1 effector protein localized to the host membrane fraction in both wild-type and DssaR-infected cells at the time points examined ( data not shown ) . 
Analysis of the host cell fractions with speciﬁc antibodies conﬁrmed the purity of each fraction . 
Calnexin , a host cell integral membrane protein , was absent from the host cytoplasmic fraction , and b-tubulin , a host cell cytoplasmic protein , was absent from the host membrane fraction . 
DnaK , a non-secreted bacterial protein , was present only in the low-speed pellet , demonstrating a lack of bacterial contamination of the host membrane and cytosolic fractions . 
As a further control for the host subcellular fractionation procedure , we infected cells with Salmonella expressing HA-tagged SifA , a SPI-2-translocated virulence factor that localizes to host cell membranes and the cytoskeleton upon delivery . 
As expected , 36,37 translocated SifA localized to the host cell membrane fraction and bacteria/cytoskeleton fraction but was not present in the cytoplasmic fraction ( Figure 6 ( b ) ) . 
GogB is a modular genetic unit capable of autonomous expression and type III secretion in other pathogenic bacterial systems 
Since GogB expression and secretion were independent of other Gifsy phage-encoded elements in Salmonella , we hypothesized that gogB is organized into an autonomous genetic module that could be horizontally transferred and utilized directly as a type III-secreted substrate by other pathogenic bacteria . 
To test this hypothesis , we transferred gogB with its upstream promoter into wild-type enteropathogenic E. coli ( EPEC ) and a type III secretion mutant deﬁcient in the type III secretion ATPase , escN , and tested whether GogB expression and secretion could be achieved in this hetero-logous host . 
GogB was expressed from its native promoter in EPEC when the bacteria were grown in DMEM ( Figure 7 ) , a medium that induces expression of the LEE pathogenicity island and induces type III secretion . 
Analysis of the secreted proteins from these cultures demonstrated that GogB secretion was type III-dependent since GogB was eliminated completely in the secreted protei fraction from the DescN strain . 
Depletion of calcium from DMEM leads to increased secretion of type III effector molecules in diffusely adhering EPEC , 38 which we have conﬁrmed for other attaching and effacing enteropathogens . 
To test whether type III 39 secretion of GogB in EPEC integrated into this Ca - dependent secretion regulation , we expressed 2C epitope-tagged GogB in EPEC during growth in DMEM in which the calcium concentration had been reduced by chelation with EGTA . 
Growth of EPEC in calcium-depleted DMEM led to increased secretion of GogB , which was entirely type III dependent as the DescN strain did not secrete GogB under the same growth conditions with calcium chelation ( Figure 7 ) . 
As a control , we examined the type III-dependent secretion of the effector protein Tir ( translocated intimin receptor ) , speciﬁc to attaching and effacing pathogens . 
As expected Tir secretion was entirely type III-dependent , as the escN mutant did not secrete Tir under any conditions . 
Upon calcium chelation , secretion of Tir into the medium increased dramatically compared to medium with 1.8 mM free calcium . 
The pattern of GogB expression and type III secretion in EPEC was similar to that of Tir , demonstrating type III-dependence of secretion and integration into a calcium-regulated secretion response ( Figure 7 ) . 
Collectively , these data indicate that GogB can be horizontally transferred as a genetic module into other pathogens with a type III secretion system and integrate into the existing regulatory and secretion machinery governing type III secretion in the recipient bacteria . 
Figure 6 . 
GogB is translocated into the host cell cytoplasm by the SPI-2 type III secretion system during infection . 
Wild-type Salmonella and the SPI-2 mutant , DssaR , each expressing epitope-tagged GogB from its native promoter ( a ) or wild-type Salmonella expressing epitope-tagged SifA from its native promoter ( b ) were used to infect HeLa cells for 12 hours . 
Infected host cells were fractionated by differential centrifugation into host nuclei/cytoskeleton/bacteria fraction ( P ) , a host membrane fraction ( M ) and host cytoplasmic fraction ( C ) according to the methods described in Materials and Methods . 
An equal volume of each fraction was analysed by Western blot using anti-HA , anti-DnaK , anti-calnexin and anti-b tubulin antibodies . 
Figure 7 . 
gogB is organized into a modular genetic unit capable of expression and type III secretion in a heterologous host . 
Wild-type enteropathogenic E. coli ( EPEC ) and an EPEC type III secretion mutant ( DescN ) were transformed with a plasmid containing the gogB gene and upstream regulatory sequence . 
Bacteria were grown in the presence or absence of EGTA under conditions that activate LEE-gene expression and type III secretion . 
Whole cell lysates ( P ) and secreted protein fractions ( S ) were tested by Western blot for the presence of GogB-HA ( upper panel ) and the E. coli type III-secreted effector , Tir ( middle panel ) . 
Blots were also probed for the bacterial cytoplasmic molecule , DnaK ( lower panel ) . 
Discussion
We have investigated the genetic and molecular features of GogB expression , secretion and trans-location into host cells and report here that gogB is a modular lysogenic conversion gene displaying autonomous expression and type III secretion with respect to other Gifsy phage-encoded factors . 
Phage-encoded molecules contribute greatly to the pathogenic potential of lysogens . 
The mobili-7 ,10 zation of lysogenic conversion genes into bacterial genomes can affect bacterial virulence in several ways , including modifying bacterial adhesion properties to host tissues , resisting immune effector functions , elaborating exotoxins , and increasing transmission of lysogenic clones . 
The secretion of phage-encoded molecules into the surrounding environment can enhance several of these virulence traits while other molecules exert their effects after translocation into target host cells by the bacterial type III secretion system . 
Based on the high degree of carboxyl-terminal similarity between GogB and proteins in other pathogens ( Z1829 in EHEC O157 : H7 , OrfL in REPEC , and the Yersinia proteins YP2634 and Y1471 ) , we predict that these uncharacterised proteins are also substrates for their respect-ive type III secretion systems and that they interact with an evolutionarily conserved pathway in target cells . 
Given the secretion and translocation data described here for GogB , investigation of these other putative type III secretion substrates seems warranted . 
Phage evolution can involve the exchange of individual genetic modules . 
In this scheme , replacement of one phage module by a sequence-unrelated ( but functionally similar ) module from another phage reconstitutes a genetically intact phage with increased genetic diversity . 
Such modules typi-40 cally encode discrete phage biological functions such as head and tail formation , excision and integration , recombination and DNA packaging ( see annotation , Figure 1 ( b ) ) . 
It has been suggested that the genetic organization of phage-encoded virulence genes ( or ﬁtness factors ) also involves individual modules that can be expressed independently from their associated phage . 
Based 10,41 on the work described here , GogB exists in Gifsy-1 as an independent transcriptional unit that allows autonomous expression in the absence of other Gifsy phage elements . 
This was evident by the fact that Salmonella strains cured of either Gifsy-1 or both Gifsy-1 and Gifsy-2 were able to express GogB from its native promoter and to secrete GogB without additional Gifsy phage proteins . 
The ability of the gogB module to be expressed and secreted in a type III-dependent manner in a heterologous bacterial pathogen suggests that acquisition of gogB by horizontal gene transfer may allow for a sudden gain of function for the lysogen , providing it has a type III secretion system for delivery of the new effector . 
The presence of a predicted 36 base stem -- loop structure at nucleotides 51 -- 86 downstream of the gogB stop codon also suggests the presence of a factor-independent transcription terminator participating in the modular nature of this lysogenic conversion gene . 
The autonomous pattern of gogB expression contrasts what is known about some phage-encoded virulence factors . 
For example , Wagner and colleagues showed that the stx2 42 gene ( encoding Shiga toxin 2 on a lambdoid phage ) in a clinical isolate of E. coli O157 : H7 is under the control of a late phage promoter that requires prophage induction and activation of the phage lytic cascade to achieve transcriptional activation and release of the toxin . 
Similarly , stx1 expression and production of Shiga toxin 1 is under the control of phage-encoded transcription factors , and the transcriptional activation of several 43 phage-encoded staphylococcal enterotoxins is dependent on phage transcription factors and promoters . 
44 Phage-encoded virulence modules can be horizontally transferred between phages of different classes by homologous or illegitimate recombination , indicating that genetic diversity of patho-45 ,46 gens can be achieved in the absence of de novo lysogenization , but rather by incorporation of gene modules into existing lysogens . 
Such a mechanism overcomes the resistance of some bacterial strains to superinfection by similar phage yet is compatibl with the need for pathogens to achieve greater genetic diversity . 
It is possible that GogB and its related proteins , speciﬁcally EHEC Z1829 , might have been acquired in this fashion . 
Z1829 is encoded by a cryptic lambdoid phage ( CP-933N ) in O-island 50 of EHEC O157 : H7 that appears to 31 have undergone genetic attrition in various phage genes but has retained Z1829 in the phage tail region . 
Closer inspection of the nucleotide content of gogB and the remainder of Gifsy-1 may also suggest a more recent acquisition of gogB and its regulatory information by Gifsy-1 . 
The gogB open reading frame has a GCC content of 32.93 % , two standard deviations lower than the mean GCC content of the rest of Gifsy-1 ( 52.56 % ) and the Salmonella genome ( 52.80 % ) . 
That gogB has recently been acquired by Gifsy-1 is further supported by the fact that some S. enterica strains appear positive for the Gifsy-1 phage but negative for gogB . 
25 Additionally , at least two S. enterica strains ( S. enterica SARC5 and S. enterica serovar Arizonae ) appear positive for gogB yet negative for Gifsy-1 . 
25 While the genomic context of gogB in these apparently Gifsy-1-negative strains remains to be investigated , this does suggest that gogB is a mobilisable element capable of integrating into different genetic contexts to be retained as an autonomous unit . 
The fact that the gogB module could be transferred horizontally to a heterologous bacterial pathogen , was expressed independently of other phage components and was integrated into the existing type III secretion system and secretion regulation features of the recipient bacteria strongly supports this notion . 
Our attempts to generate Gifsy-1 lysogens in enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic E. coli have been unsuccessful . 
However , pathogenic E. coli contain numerous prophages and cryptic prophages of various origins , suggesting perhaps that these strains 9,10 possess superinfection immunity . 
It will be of interest to test whether gogB can be incorporated into existing lysogens that are resistant to Gifsy-1 lysogenization and whether the acquisition of gogB under these conditions confers a selective advantage to the recipient bacteria in the appropriate infection model . 
That gogB is located between the Gifsy-1 structural gene operon and the attachment site , a region of the lambdoid phage capable of accommodating lysogenic conversion genes , is particularly interesting since gogB appears to be a mosaic of two families of homologous genes . 
It is possible that gogB may have arisen by illegitimate recombination between a lysogenic conversion gene containing an N-terminal type III secretion signal and LRR domain , with another phage gene from the C-termi-nal homology group . 
While it is thought that few mosaic boundaries fall within open reading frames ( a mosaic of two structurally distinct molecules is likely to be non-functional ) the 47 modular domain structure of many bacterial effectors may lend itself to the likelihood of 48 -- 51 such mosaic genes being functional . 
One of the interesting features of autonomous gogB expression was its co-regulation with other SPI-2 virulence genes by SsrB , the transcriptional activator of the SsrA/SsrB two-component regulatory system . 
The ability of lysogenic conversion genes to integrate into the existing transcriptional regulation circuitry and to use the type III secretion machinery for directed delivery into host cells is an important aspect in the co-evolution of bacteria-phage biology and allows the recipient bacteria to beneﬁt directly from lysogeny . 
However , it has not been fully elucidated whether this represents an immediate acquisition of a virulence trait , or whether the newly acquired virulence genes require additional ﬁne-tuning at the genetic level to integrate properly into regulatory and secretory virulence pathways . 
Clearly , the utility of newly acquired virulence properties encoded by lysogenic conversion genes also depends on the recipient bacterial strain , its genetic components and existing molecular `` hardware '' for delivering the new molecule to a productive site of action . 
Even though GogB was secreted by both the SPI-1 and SPI-2-encoded type III secretion systems in vitro , several lines of evidence indicate that SPI-2 is likely the major route of GogB translocation into host cells during infection . 
First , secretion of GogB was reduced when bacteria were grown under SPI-2-inducing conditions at neutral pH , yet secretion was enhanced when bacteria were shifted to an acidic pH environment in which assembly of the SPI-2 type III apparatus takes place . 
Secondly , 52 gogB expression was co-regulated with other SPI-2 genes and was decreased in an ssrB mutant lacking the SPI-2 transcriptional activator . 
In contrast , gogB expression under SPI-1-inducing conditions was not co-regulated with other HilA-dependent virulence genes encoded within SPI-1 . 
Third , gogB expression was eliminated completely in an ssrB mutant during the intracellular infection process and fourth , translocation of GogB into the host cytosol was eliminated in a SPI-2 mutant that was fully competent for cell invasion and SPI-1-mediated type III translocation . 
Previous work indicated that genetic elements encoded within Gifsy-1 inﬂuence the virulence potential of Salmonella but this phenotype was only apparent in the absence of Gifsy-2 . 
It is 26 hypothesized that one or more additional factors encoded in Gifsy-2 might perform functionally similar roles to GogB or other Gifsy-1 factors during infection , although an obvious homologue of GogB is not apparent in Gifsy-2 . 
It was recently reported that two signature-tagged mutants of Gifsy-1 ( STM2586 , STM2587 ) were attenuated for caecal colonization of 14-day old chicks . 
These genes are 53 encoded immediately downstream of gogB on the opposite strand in the tail ﬁbre region of Gifsy-1 . 
Both genes are annotated as phage tail assembly proteins , so their putative role in bacterial pathogenesis or in improving bacterial ﬁtness is currentl unknown . 
The EHEC O157 : H7 gogB homologue ( Z1829 ) was not identiﬁed in a signature-tagged screen of bovine intestinal colonization , although 54 it is possible that this particular mutant was not present in the library that was screened . 
It also remains possible that other EHEC strains will use this protein as a virulence factor during colonization . 
In fact , such variation in the use of virulence factors might be expected between different strains of the same species , given that different strains can contain a variable assortment of lysogenic phages with functionally overlapping gene sets . 
It also seems likely that some phage-encoded virulence factors perform functions during a speciﬁc stage of infection or in a speciﬁc host species . 
In this way , 53 acquisition of phage-encoded virulence genes would be a critical step in allowing previously tissue - or host-restricted bacteria access to new ecological niches , an event that often precedes the 7 emergence of new strains with epidemic virulence potential . 
It also stands to reason that the 12,55 -- 57 functional importance of host - or tissue-speciﬁc virulence factors would remain cryptic in the absence of the proper host context . 
Information on the intracellular function of GogB and its homologues from other pathogenic bacteria should lead to important gains in our understanding of evolutionarily conserved host -- pathogen-phage interactions . 
Materials and Methods
Bacterial strains and plasmid construction
S. enterica serovar Typhimurium strain SL1344 was used in this study and all mutants are derivatives of SL1344 . 
SL1344 strains cured of the Gifsy-1 prophage or both Gifsy-1 and Gifsy-2 prophages have been described previously . 
Enteropathogenic E. coli strain E2348/69 11,26 and an isogenic mutant lacking type III secretion ( DescN ) were used as heterologous hosts for expression and secretion experiments . 
A Salmonella mutant defective for both SPI-1 and SPI-2-mediated type III secretion was constructed by generalized P22 transduction of a marked invATKan mutation to a strain with an unmarked , inframe deletion of ssaR . 
Bacterial cultures were grown in Luria -- Bertani ( LB ) liquid medium or on LB agar plates supplemented with the appropriate antibiotic ( s ) at the following concentrations : kanamycin , 50 mg ml ; carbe-K1 nicillin , 100 mg ml ; streptomycin , 50 mg ml . 
To con-K1 K1 struct an epitope-tagged version of GogB , the gogB open reading frame plus w1 kb of the upstream regulatory region was ampliﬁed by PCR from puriﬁed SL1344 chromosomal DNA with the primers BKC41 and BKC42 ( 5 0ACG CGT CGA CGT CAA TAA TCA GCG CCT GCA 3 0 and 50 GAA GAT CTA CGA TTT CTA TTT TTA GGC TTA TAT TTA TCC 3 0 ) , digested with SalI and BglII and cloned into the corresponding restriction sites of a pACYC184-based plasmid called psseAT2HA in 58 which the sseA coding region had been removed as a SalI/BglII fragment . 
The gogB coding region , in-frame hemagglutinin epitope and upstream promoter region was then removed from this pACYC-based vector with SalI and XbaI and cloned into the corresponding sites of pWSK29 and pWSK129 such that the gogB coding 59 region and promoter were in the opposite orientation to the vector-encoded lacZ promoter . 
Bioinformatics analysis of gogB
A sequence comparison between GogB and proteins in public databases was performed using the Blastp algorithm and Clustal W . 
The primary amino acid sequence of a family of proteins containing leucine-rich repeats was used to deﬁne a domain hidden Markov model that was compared to the primary amino acid sequence of GogB . 
Signal peptides were predicted using Signalp version 2.0 b2 † using default parameters for Gram-negative 60 bacteria . 
Cell culture and infection assays
HeLa cells were maintained in Dulbecco 's Modiﬁed Eagle medium ( DMEM ; Hyclone , Logan , Utah ) supplemented with 10 % ( v/v ) foetal calf serum ( FCS ) . 
Cells were seeded in 24-well culture dishes 18 hours prior to infection . 
All cells were cultured at 37 8C in 5 % CO2 . 
For gentamicin protection assays , HeLa cells were infected with late log-phase bacteria for ten minutes as described . 
At the indicated times after infection , 58 gentamicin-treated cells were washed with PBS and then solubilized in 0.25 ml of 1 % ( w/v ) Triton X-100 , 0.1 % ( w/v ) SDS in PBS . 
Lysates were mixed with an equal volume of SDS-PAGE sample buffer ( 100 mM Tris -- HCl ( pH 6.8 ) , 20 % ( v/v ) glycerol , 4 % ( w/v ) SDS , 0.002 % ( v/v ) bromophenol blue and 200 mM dithiothreitol ) and probed by Western blotting for the presence of epitope-tagged GogB . 
In vitro secretion assays and analysis of secreted proteins
Salmonella strains were grown overnight in LB broth , washed in either LB or low phosphate , low magnesiumcontaining medium ( LPM ) and then inoculated at a 32 1 : 50 dilution in either 3 ml of LB , LPM pH 7.0 or LPM pH 5.8 . 
Growth in LB promotes activation of SPI-1 virulence genes while LPM is a SPI-2-inducing medium . 
Salmonella cultures were grown at 37 8C with shaking for three to six hours after which A600 was measured . 
For enteropatho-genic E. coli studies , wild-type EPEC strain E2348/69 and an isogenic derivative with a deletion of the essential type III secretion component escN ( DescN ) were grown over-night in standing LB broth , washed in PBS and inoculated at a 1 : 50 dilution into DMEM or DMEM containing 2 mM EGTA to chelate free Ca . 
EPEC cultures were 2C grown standing for six hours at 37 8C and 5 % CO2 after which A600 was measured and used to standardize the protein samples . 
Bacteria were collected by centrifugation for two minutes at 12,000 rpm ( 13,400 g ) ( 4 8C ) . 
The supernatant was passed through a low-protein binding 0.22 mm HT Tuffryn membrane ( Pall Life Sciences ) and the sterilized ﬂow-through was precipitated with tri-chloroacetic acid ( 10 % ( v/v ) ﬁnal concentration ) at 4 8C for four to 16 hours . 
Precipitated proteins were washed with ice-cold acetone and solubilized with a volume of 2 ! 
SDS-sample buffer adjusted according to the A600 of the original culture . 
Proteins from equivalent numbers of bacterial cells were separated on SDS-12 % polyacryl-amide gels , transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and then blocked in Tris-buffered saline containing 0.1 % ( v/v 
† www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/ 
Tween 20 ( TBST ) and 5 % ( w/v ) powdered non-fat milk for one hour at room temperature . 
Primary antibodies used were mouse anti-HA ( Covance ; 1 : 1500 ) , mouse anti-DnaK ( Stressgen Biotechnologies ; 1 : 4000 ) , and rat anti-Tir ( 1 : 5000 ) . 
Secondary antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase were used at a 1 : 5000 dilution in TBST for one hour at room temperature . 
Antibody complexes were detected using enhanced chemiluminescence ( Amersham Biosciences ) . 
Chemiluminescent b-galactosidase assays
gogB promoter activity was examined using transcriptional fusions to lacZ and a chemiluminescence assay described . 
A promoterless lacZY gene cassette was 32 integrated downstream of the gogB promoter on the Salmonella chromosome using FLP-mediated site-speciﬁc recombination between pCE36 and wild-type Salmonella 61 or an ssrB Salmonella mutant that contained a chromosomal FLP recognition target ( FRT ) site downstream of the gogB promoter . 
The resulting strains contain a 35 transcriptional fusion of the gogB promoter to lacZ . 
The lacZ reporter strains were cultured overnight in LB medium , then washed twice in LPM medium and inoculated into fresh LPM medium at pH 5.8 . 
Cultures were incubated with shaking at 37 8C for ﬁve hours . 
For b-galactosidase assays , 0.2 ml of the culture was removed and the bacteria were pelleted by centrifugation . 
The supernatant was discarded and the bacterial pellet was resuspended in 0.2 ml of PBS and then lysed with 50 ml of chloroform . 
2 ml of the lysate was transferred to a well of a black microtitre plate containing 100 ml of Galacto-Star substrate mix ( Applied Biosystems , Bedford , MA ) . 
Reactions were incubated for 60 minutes at room temperature and luminescence was detected with a Spectraﬂuor Plus ( TECAN , Austria ) . 
Light emission was recorded as relative light units ( RLU ) and normalized to the optical density based on A600 measurements derived from matched bacterial cultures . 
Each condition was performed in quadruplicate and averaged . 
Translocation assay and host cell fractionation procedure
Host cells were infected with Salmonella strains expres-sing epitope-tagged GogB or epitope-tagged SifA as described above . 
Infected host cells were mechanically fractionated and separated by differential centrifugation . 
Infected cells were washed and scraped into PBS , then mechanically disrupted by passage through a 22-gauge needle in a buffer containing 3 mM imidazole ( pH 7.4 ) , 250 mM sucrose , 0.5 mM EDTA , and a cocktail of protease inhibitors . 
Differential centrifugation was used to generate a : ( i ) bacteria/nuclei/cytoskeleton fraction ( 3000g pellet ) , ( ii ) a membrane fraction ( 41,000 g pellet ) and ( iii ) a cytoplasmic fraction ( 41,000 g supernatant ) . 
Each fraction was analysed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting using the following primary antibodies : mouse anti-HA ( 1 : 1500 ) , mouse anti-DnaK ( 1 : 4000 ) , rabbit anti-calnexin ( 1 : 1000 , Stressgen ) , mouse anti-b tubulin ( 1 : 1000 , clone E7 , Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank , University of Iowa ) , rabbit anti-SopB ( 1 : 1000 ) . 
All primary antibodies were diluted in a blocking solution of TBST with 5 % ( w/v ) non-fat milk . 
Secondary antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase were used at 1 : 5000 and antigen -- antibody complexes were detected using enhanced chemiluminescence . 
Acknowledgements
We thank Claudia Lupp , Philip Hardwidge , Wanyin Deng and Jose Puente for helpful discussions and insightful comments and we gratefully acknowledge David Goode for bioinformatics support related to this work . 
This work was supported by grants to B.B.F. from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research ( CIHR ) , The Howard Hughes Medical Institute ( HHMI ) and the Canadian Bacterial Diseases Network . 
B.K.C. & M.E.W. are recipients of postdoctoral fellowships from the CIHR and Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research ( MSFHR ) , N.F.B. is a MSFHR postdoctoral fellow and W.W.L.H. is a recipient of a MSFHR Trainee Award and a CIHR Doctoral Scholarship . 
F.S.L.B. is a MSFHR scholar , B.B.F. is a CIHR Distinguished Investigator , an HHMI International Research Scholar and the University of British Columbia Peter Wall Distinguished Professor . 
References 
1 . 
Galan , J. E. ( 1996 ) . 
Molecular genetic bases of Salmonella entry into host cells . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
20 , 263 -- 271 . 
2 . 
Ochman , H. , Soncini , F. C. , Solomon , F. & Groisman , E. A. ( 1996 ) . 
Identiﬁcation of a pathogenicity island required for Salmonella survival in host cells . 
Proc . 
Natl Acad . 
Sci . 
USA , 93 , 7800 -- 7804 . 
3 . 
Shea , J. E. , Hensel , M. , Gleeson , C. & Holden , D. W. ( 1996 ) . 
Identiﬁcation of a virulence locus encoding a second type III secretion system in Salmonella typhimurium . 
Proc . 
Natl Acad . 
Sci . 
USA , 93 , 2593 -- 2597 . 
4 . 
Galan , J. E. ( 1999 ) . 
Interaction of Salmonella with host cells through the centisome 63 type III secretion system . 
Curr . 
Opin . 
Microbiol . 
2 , 46 -- 50 . 
5 . 
Waterman , S. R. & Holden , D. W. ( 2003 ) . 
Functions and effectors of the Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 type III secretion system . 
Cell . 
Microbiol . 
5 , 501 -- 511 . 
6 . 
Ochman , H. , Lawrence , J. G. & Groisman , E. A. ( 2000 ) . 
Lateral gene transfer and the nature of bacterial innovation . 
Nature , 405 , 299 -- 304 . 
7 . 
Wagner , P. L. & Waldor , M. K. ( 2002 ) . 
Bacteriophage control of bacterial virulence . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
70 , 3985 -- 3993 . 
8 . 
Thomson , N. , Baker , S. , Pickard , D. , Fookes , M. , Anjum , M. , Hamlin , N. et al. ( 2004 ) . 
The role of prophage-like elements in the diversity of Salmonella enterica serovars . 
J. Mol . 
Biol . 
339 , 279 -- 300 . 
9 . 
Boyd , E. F. & Brussow , H. ( 2002 ) . 
Common themes among bacteriophage-encoded virulence factors and diversity among the bacteriophages involved . 
Trends Microbiol . 
10 , 521 -- 529 . 
10 . 
Brussow , H. , Canchaya , C. & Hardt , W. D. ( 2004 ) . 
Phages and the evolution of bacterial pathogens : from genomic rearrangements to lysogenic conversion . 
Microbiol . 
Mol . 
Biol . 
Rev. 68 , 560 -- 602 . 
11 . 
Figueroa-Bossi , N. , Uzzau , S. , Maloriol , D. & Bossi , L. ( 2001 ) . 
Variable assortment of prophages provides a transferable repertoire of pathogenic determinants in Salmonella . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
39 , 260 -- 271 . 
12 . 
Mirold , S. , Rabsch , W. , Rohde , M. , Stender , S. , Tschape , H. , Russmann , H. et al. ( 1999 ) . 
Isolation of a temperate bacteriophage encoding the type II 
effector protein SopE from an epidemic Salmonella typhimurium strain . 
Proc . 
Natl Acad . 
Sci . 
USA , 96 , 9845 -- 9850 . 
13 . 
Hardt , W. D. , Chen , L. M. , Schuebel , K. E. , Bustelo , X. R. & Galan , J. E. ( 1998 ) . 
S. typhimurium encodes an activator of Rho GTPases that induces membrane rufﬂing and nuclear responses in host cells . 
Cell , 93 , 815 -- 826 . 
14 . 
Figueroa-Bossi , N. , Coissac , E. , Netter , P. & Bossi , L. ( 1997 ) . 
Unsuspected prophage-like elements in Salmonella typhimurium . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
25 , 161 -- 173 . 
15 . 
Bakshi , C. S. , Singh , V. P. , Wood , M. W. , Jones , P. W. , Wallis , T. S. & Galyov , E. E. ( 2000 ) . 
Identiﬁcation of SopE2 , a Salmonella secreted protein which is highly homologous to SopE and involved in bacterial invasion of epithelial cells . 
J. Bacteriol . 
182 , 2341 -- 2344 . 
16 . 
Stender , S. , Friebel , A. , Linder , S. , Rohde , M. , Mirold , S. & Hardt , W. D. ( 2000 ) . 
Identiﬁcation of SopE2 from Salmonella typhimurium , a conserved guanine nucleo-tide exchange factor for Cdc42 of the host cell . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
36 , 1206 -- 1221 . 
17 . 
Miao , E. A. , Scherer , C. A. , Tsolis , R. M. , Kingsley , R. A. , Adams , L. G. , Baumler , A. J. & Miller , S. I. ( 1999 ) . 
Salmonella typhimurium leucine-rich repeat proteins are targeted to the SPI1 and SPI2 type III secretion systems . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
34 , 850 -- 864 . 
18 . 
Miao , E. A. & Miller , S. I. ( 2000 ) . 
A conserved amino acid sequence directing intracellular type III secretion by Salmonella typhimurium . 
Proc . 
Natl Acad . 
Sci . 
USA , 97 , 7539 -- 7544 . 
19 . 
Ho , T. D. , Figueroa-Bossi , N. , Wang , M. , Uzzau , S. , Bossi , L. & Slauch , J. M. ( 2002 ) . 
Identiﬁcation of GtgE , a novel virulence factor encoded on the Gifsy-2 bacteriophage of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi-murium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
184 , 5234 -- 5239 . 
20 . 
Ho , T. D. & Slauch , J. M. ( 2001 ) . 
Characterization of grvA , an antivirulence gene on the gifsy-2 phage in Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
183 , 611 -- 620 . 
21 . 
De Groote , M. A. , Ochsner , U. A. , Shiloh , M. U. , Nathan , C. , McCord , J. M. , Dinauer , M. C. et al. ( 1997 ) . 
Periplasmic superoxide dismutase protects Salmonella from products of phagocyte NADPH-oxidase and nitric oxide synthase . 
Proc . 
Natl Acad . 
Sci . 
USA , 94 , 13997 -- 14001 . 
22 . 
Fang , F. C. , DeGroote , M. A. , Foster , J. W. , Baumler , A. J. , Ochsner , U. , Testerman , T. et al. ( 1999 ) . 
Virulent Salmonella typhimurium has two periplasmic Cu , Zn-superoxide dismutases . 
Proc . 
Natl Acad . 
Sci . 
USA , 96 , 7502 -- 7507 . 
23 . 
Farrant , J. L. , Sansone , A. , Canvin , J. R. , Pallen , M. J. , Langford , P. R. , Wallis , T. S. et al. ( 1997 ) . 
Bacterial copper - and zinc-cofactored superoxide dismutase contributes to the pathogenesis of systemic salmo-nellosis . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
25 , 785 -- 796 . 
24 . 
Stanley , T. L. , Ellermeier , C. D. & Slauch , J. M. ( 2000 ) . 
Tissue-speciﬁc gene expression identiﬁes a gene in the lysogenic phage Gifsy-1 that affects Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium survival in Peyer 's patches . 
J. Bacteriol . 
182 , 4406 -- 4413 . 
25 . 
Porwollik , S. , Wong , R. M. & McClelland , M. ( 2002 ) . 
Evolutionary genomics of Salmonella : gene acquisitions revealed by microarray analysis . 
Proc . 
Natl Acad . 
Sci . 
USA , 99 , 8956 -- 8961 . 
26 . 
Figueroa-Bossi , N. & Bossi , L. ( 1999 ) . 
Inducible prophages contribute to Salmonella virulence in mice . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
33 , 167 -- 176 . 
27 . 
Boland , A. , Sory , M. P. , Iriarte , M. , Kerbourch , C. , Wattiau , P. & Cornelis , G. R. ( 1996 ) . 
Status of YopM 
and YopN in the Yersinia Yop virulon : YopM of Y. enterocolitica is internalized inside the cytosol of PU5-1 .8 macrophages by the YopB , D , N delivery apparatus . 
EMBO J. 15 , 5191 -- 5201 . 
28 . 
Buchrieser , C. , Glaser , P. , Rusniok , C. , Nedjari , H. , D'Hauteville , H. , Kunst , F. et al. ( 2000 ) . 
The virulence plasmid pWR100 and the repertoire of proteins secreted by the type III secretion apparatus of Shigella ﬂexneri . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
38 , 760 -- 771 . 
29 . 
Toyotome , T. , Suzuki , T. , Kuwae , A. , Nonaka , T. , Fukuda , H. , Imajoh-Ohmi , S. et al. ( 2001 ) . 
Shigella protein IpaH ( 9.8 ) is secreted from bacteria within mammalian cells and transported to the nucleus . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
276 , 32071 -- 32079 . 
30 . 
Brumell , J. H. , Marcus , S. L. & Finlay , B. B. ( 2000 ) . 
N-terminal conservation of putative type III secreted effectors of Salmonella typhimurium . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
36 , 773 -- 774 . 
31 . 
Perna , N. T. , Plunkett , G. , III , Burland , V. , Mau , B. , Glasner , J. D. , Rose , D. J. et al. ( 2001 ) . 
Genome sequence of enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157 : H7 . 
Nature , 409 , 529 -- 533 . 
32 . 
Coombes , B. K. , Brown , N. F. , Valdez , Y. , Brumell , J. H. & Finlay , B. B. ( 2004 ) . 
Expression and secretion of Salmonella Pathogenicity Island-2 virulence genes in response to acidiﬁcation exhibit differential requirements of a functional type III secretion apparatus and SsaL . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
279 , 49804 -- 49815 . 
33 . 
Beuzon , C. R. , Banks , G. , Deiwick , J. , Hensel , M. & Holden , D. W. ( 1999 ) . 
pH-dependent secretion of SseB , a product of the SPI-2 type III secretion system of Salmonella typhimurium . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
33 , 806 -- 816 . 
34 . 
Deiwick , J. , Nikolaus , T. , Erdogan , S. & Hensel , M. ( 1999 ) . 
Environmental regulation of Salmonella patho-genicity island 2 gene expression . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
31 , 1759 -- 1773 . 
35 . 
Uzzau , S. , Figueroa-Bossi , N. , Rubino , S. & Bossi , L. ( 2001 ) . 
Epitope tagging of chromosomal genes in Salmonella . 
Proc . 
Natl Acad . 
Sci . 
USA , 98 , 15264 -- 15269 . 
36 . 
Brumell , J. H. , Goosney , D. L. & Finlay , B. B. ( 2002 ) . 
SifA , a type III secreted effector of Salmonella typhimurium , directs Salmonella-induced ﬁlament ( Sif ) formation along microtubules . 
Trafﬁc , 3 , 407 -- 415 . 
37 . 
Boucrot , E. , Beuzon , C. R. , Holden , D. W. , Gorvel , J. P. & Meresse , S. ( 2003 ) . 
Salmonella typhimurium SifA effector protein requires its membrane-anchoring C-terminal hexapeptide for its biological function . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
278 , 14196 -- 14202 . 
38 . 
Ide , T. , Michgehl , S. , Knappstein , S. , Heusipp , G. & Schmidt , M. A. ( 2003 ) . 
Differential modulation by Ca2C of type III secretion of diffusely adhering enteropathogenic Escherichia coli . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
71 , 1725 -- 1732 . 
39 . 
Deng , W. , Li , Y. , Hardwidge , P. R. , Frey , E. A. , Pfuetzner , R. A. , Lee , S. et al. ( 2005 ) . 
Regulation of type III secretion hierarchy of translocators and effectors in attaching and effacing bacterial patho-gens . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
In the press . 
40 . 
Botstein , D. ( 1980 ) . 
A theory of modular evolution for bacteriophages . 
Ann . 
NY Acad . 
Sci . 
354 , 484 -- 490 . 
41 . 
Hendrix , R. W. , Lawrence , J. G. , Hatfull , G. F. & Casjens , S. ( 2000 ) . 
The origins and ongoing evolution of viruses . 
Trends Microbiol . 
8 , 504 -- 508 . 
42 . 
Wagner , P. L. , Neely , M. N. , Zhang , X. , Acheson , D. W. , Waldor , M. K. & Friedman , D. I. ( 2001 ) . 
Role for a phage promoter in Shiga toxin 2 expression from a pathogenic Escherichia coli strain . 
J. Bacteriol . 
183 , 2081 -- 2085 . 
43 . 
Wagner , P. L. , Livny , J. , Neely , M. N. , Acheson , D. W. 
Friedman , D. I. & Waldor , M. K. ( 2002 ) . 
Bacteriophage control of Shiga toxin 1 production and release by Escherichia coli . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
44 , 957 -- 970 . 
44 . 
Sumby , P. & Waldor , M. K. ( 2003 ) . 
Transcription of the toxin genes present within the Staphylococcal phage phiSa3ms is intimately linked with the phage 's life cycle . 
J. Bacteriol . 
185 , 6841 -- 6851 . 
45 . 
Mirold , S. , Rabsch , W. , Tschape , H. & Hardt , W. D. ( 2001 ) . 
Transfer of the Salmonella type III effector sopE between unrelated phage families . 
J. Mol . 
Biol . 
312 , 7 -- 16 . 
46 . 
Hendrix , R. W. , Smith , M. C. , Burns , R. N. , Ford , M. E. & Hatfull , G. F. ( 1999 ) . 
Evolutionary relationships among diverse bacteriophages and prophages : all the world 's a phage . 
Proc . 
Natl Acad . 
Sci . 
USA , 96 , 2192 -- 2197 . 
47 . 
Hendrix , R. W. ( 2002 ) . 
Bacteriophages : evolution of the majority . 
Theor . 
Popul . 
Biol . 
61 , 471 -- 480 . 
48 . 
Kaniga , K. , Uralil , J. , Bliska , J. B. & Galan , J. E. ( 1996 ) . 
A secreted protein tyrosine phosphatase with modular effector domains in the bacterial pathogen Salmonella typhimurium . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
21 , 633 -- 641 . 
49 . 
Evdokimov , A. G. , Tropea , J. E. , Routzahn , K. M. , Copeland , T. D. & Waugh , D. S. ( 2001 ) . 
Structure of the N-terminal domain of Yersinia pestis YopH at 2.0 A resolution . 
Acta . 
Crystallog . 
sect . 
D , 57 , 793 -- 799 . 
50 . 
Fu , Y. & Galan , J. E. ( 1998 ) . 
The Salmonella typhimurium tyrosine phosphatase SptP is translocated into host cells and disrupts the actin cytoskeleton . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
27 , 359 -- 368 . 
51 . 
Olsson , J. , Edqvist , P. J. , Broms , J. E. , Forsberg , A. , Wolf-Watz , H. & Francis , M. S. ( 2004 ) . 
The YopD translocator of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis is a multifunctional protein comprised of discrete domains . 
J. Bacteriol . 
186 , 4110 -- 4123 . 
52 . 
Rappl , C. , Deiwick , J. & Hensel , M. ( 2003 ) . 
Acidic pH is required for the functional assembly of the type III secretion system encoded by Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 . 
FEMS Microbiol . 
Letters , 226 , 363 -- 372 . 
53 . 
Morgan , E. , Campbell , J. D. , Rowe , S. C. , Bispham , J. , 
Stevens , M. P. , Bowen , A. J. et al. ( 2004 ) . 
Identiﬁcation of host-speciﬁc colonization factors of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
54 , 994 -- 1010 . 
54 . 
Dziva , F. , van Diemen , P. M. , Stevens , M. P. , Smith , A. J. & Wallis , T. S. ( 2004 ) . 
Identiﬁcation of Escherichia coli O157 : H7 genes inﬂuencing colonization of the bovine gastrointestinal tract using signature-tagged mutagenesis . 
Microbiology , 150 , 3631 -- 3645 . 
55 . 
Waldor , M. K. & Mekalanos , J. J. ( 1996 ) . 
Lysogenic conversion by a ﬁlamentous phage encoding cholera toxin . 
Science , 272 , 1910 -- 1914 . 
56 . 
Zhang , S. , Santos , R. L. , Tsolis , R. M. , Mirold , S. , Hardt , W. D. , Adams , L. G. & Baumler , A. J. ( 2002 ) . 
Phage mediated horizontal transfer of the sopE1 gene increases enteropathogenicity of Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium for calves . 
FEMS Microbiol . 
Letters , 217 , 243 -- 247 . 
57 . 
Karaolis , D. K. , Johnson , J. A. , Bailey , C. C. , Boedeker , E. C. , Kaper , J. B. & Reeves , P. R. ( 1998 ) . 
A Vibrio cholerae pathogenicity island associated with epidemic and pandemic strains . 
Proc . 
Natl Acad . 
Sci . 
USA , 95 , 3134 -- 3139 . 
58 . 
Coombes , B. K. , Brown , N. F. , Kujat-Choy , S. , Vallance , B. A. & Finlay , B. B. ( 2003 ) . 
SseA is required for translocation of Salmonella pathogenicity island-2 effectors into host cells . 
Microbes Infect . 
5 , 561 -- 570 . 
59 . 
Wang , R. F. & Kushner , S. R. ( 1991 ) . 
Construction of versatile low-copy-number vectors for cloning , sequencing and gene expression in Escherichia coli . 
Gene , 100 , 195 -- 199 . 
60 . 
Nielsen , H. , Engelbrecht , J. , Brunak , S. & von Heijne , G. ( 1997 ) . 
Identiﬁcation of prokaryotic and eukaryotic signal peptides and prediction of their cleavage sites . 
Protein Eng . 
10 , 1 -- 6 . 
61 . 
Ellermeier , C. D. , Janakiraman , A. & Slauch , J. M. ( 2002 ) . 
Construction of targeted single copy lac fusions using lambda Red and FLP-mediated sitespeciﬁc recombination in bacteria . 
Gene , 290 , 153 -- 161 .