Blackwell Science , LtdOxford , UKMMIMolecular Microbiology0950-382XBlackwell Publishing Ltd , 2005 ? 
200556512341245Original ArticleSalmonellapathogenesisandc-diGMPK . 
B.Hisert etal . 
Molecular Microbiology ( 2005 ) 56 ( 5 ) , 1234 -- 1245 
antioxidant defence and killing of macrophages: role of P
cyclic diGM 
Katherine B. Hisert ,1 Michael MacCoss ,2 
Michael U. Shiloh ,1 K. Heran Darwin ,1 Shaneen Singh ,1 Roger A. Jones ,3 Sabine Ehrt ,1 Zhaoying Zhang ,3 Barbara L. Gaffney ,3 Sheetal Gandotra ,1 David W. Holden ,4 Diana Murray1 and Carl Nathan1 * 1Department of Microbiology and Immunology , Weill Medical College of Cornell University , and Programs in Immunology and Microbial Pathogenesis , Molecular Biology and/or Structural Biology/Biochemistry , Weill Graduate School of Medical Sciences of Cornell University , New York , NY , USA . 
2Department of Genome Sciences , University of Washington , Seattle , WA , USA . 
3Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology , Rutgers University , Piscataway , NJ , USA . 
4Center for Molecular Microbiology and Infection , Imperial College , London , UK . 
A glutamate-alanine-leucine (EAL) domain protein of
Salmonella controls bacterial survival in mice,
Summary
Signature-tagged transposon mutagenesis of Salmo-nella with differential recovery from wild-type and immunodeﬁcient mice revealed that the gene here named cdgR [ for c-diguanylate ( c-diGMP ) regulator ] is required for the bacterium to resist host phagocyte oxidase in vivo . 
CdgR consists solely of a glutamate-alanine-leucine ( EAL ) domain , a predicted cyclic diGMP ( c-diGMP ) phosphodiesterase . 
Disruption of cdgR decreased bacterial resistance to hydrogen peroxide and accelerated bacterial killing of macroph-ages . 
An ultrasensitive assay revealed c-diGMP in wild-type Salmonella with increased levels in the CdgR-deﬁcient mutant . 
Thus , besides its known role in regulating cellulose synthesis and bioﬁlm formation , bacterial c-diGMP also regulates host -- pathogen interactions involving antioxidant defence and cytotoxicity . 
Accepted 22 February , 2005 . 
* For correspondence . 
E-mail cnathan@med.cornell.edu; Tel. ( +1 ) 212 746 6505 ; Fax ( +1 ) 212 746 8587 . 
Introduction
Salmonella enterica Var . 
Typhimurium ( Stm ) is a facultative intracellular pathogen whose infection of mice has been studied intensively as a model of typhoid fever and a paradigm for host -- pathogen interactions . 
Whether Stm kills macrophages ( Chen et al. , 1996 ; Monack et al. , 1996 ; Jesenberger et al. , 2000 ) or macrophages kill Stm ( Shiloh et al. , 1999 ; Mastroeni et al. , 2000 ; Vazquez-Torres et al. , 2000a ) depends on bacterial strain , growth phase , multiplicity of infection ( moi ) and the immunological activation of the macrophages . 
To kill macrophages quickly , Stm relies on SipB , a protein released through the Salmonella pathogenicity island ( SPI ) -1 type III secretion system ( TTSS ) ( Hersh et al. , 1999 ) . 
To kill Stm , macrophages rely ﬁrst on phagocyte oxidase ( phox ) , a source of reactive oxygen intermediates ( ROI ) , and later on inducible nitric oxide synthase ( iNOS ; NOS2 ) , a source of reactive nitrogen intermediates ( RNI ) ( Mastroeni et al. , 2000 ; VazquezTorres et al. , 2000a ) , in addition to other antimicrobial effects associated with phagolysosome fusion . 
Signature-tagged transposon mutagenesis ( STM ) was introduced as a screen for genes involved in bacterial virulence ( Hensel et al. , 1995 ) . 
Here we applied STM differentially in a search for new genes contributing to defence of Stm against phox , iNOS or other host pathways . 
We collected Stm mutants that appeared to be attenuated during STM analysis in wild-type ( WT ) mice and re-screened them in mice deﬁcient in phox , iNOS or both . 
We sought Stm mutants that were attenuated in WT mice but that were restored in virulence in immunodeﬁcient mice . 
Such ` attenuation reversal ' ( AR ) mutants were expected to contain disruptions in genes required for growth in the presence of the host pathway that was absent in the immunodeﬁcient mice . 
One conﬁrmed AR mutant was discovered . 
The transposon had inserted in a gene encoding an unannotated protein that we predicted might act as a cyclic diGMP ( c-diGMP ) phosphodiesterase . 
We discovered that this protein suppressed bacterial c-diGMP levels and killing of macrophages , while promoting resistance to hydrogen peroxide . 
© 2005 Blackwell Publishing Lt 
Results
CdgR controls resistance of Stm to phox in vivo and to hydrogen peroxide in vitro 
Competitive index 
Competitive inde 
We used a modiﬁed version of STM to identify genes that enable Stm to resist phox or iNOS . 
First , we repeated the original STM screen of 960 transposon mutants ( Hensel et al. , 1995 ) in C57BL/6 instead of BALB/c mice . 
Stm mutants were considered attenuated if their transposon tags were under-represented among those recovered from the spleen 3 days later as judged by ﬁlter hybridization . 
Attenuated mutants were reassembled with randomly chosen virulent mutants at a ratio of 1:2 in three new pools of 96 mutants each . 
Each new pool was used to infect four mice each of the following C57BL/6 strains : WT , NOS2 -- / -- , gp91phox -- / -- and gp91phox -- / -- NOS2 -- / -- ( MacMicking et al. , 1995 ; Shiloh et al. , 1999 ) . 
Thirty-one mutants appeared to be under-represented among bacteria recovered from spleens of all four strains of mice ( Table S1 ) , including 13 identiﬁed in the original screen in BALB/c mice ( Hensel et al. , 1995 ) . 
An additional seven mutants appeared to be attenuated in WT mice but fully virulent in 
Salmonella pathogenesis and c-diGMP 1235 at least one of the immunodeﬁcient strains . 
These were candidates for AR mutants . 
To identify genuine AR mutants , we assessed the number of colony-forming units ( cfu ) recovered from spleens of WT and immunodeﬁcient mice after mixed infection in competition with WT Stm . 
Only mutant AR5 demonstrated reversal of attenuation in immunodeﬁcient mice during co-infection ( Table S2 ) , being recovered at ~ 10 % the level of WT Stm from WT and NOS2 -- / -- mice , but at the same level as WT Stm from gp91phox -- / -- and gp91phox -- / -- NOS2 -- / -- mice ( Fig. 1A ) . 
Thus , AR5 is disrupted in a gene that defends Stm against phox . 
The transposon in AR5 had inserted into ydiV , a gene that lies on the Stm chromosome 62 bp upstream of ydiU ( Fig. 1B ) . 
Based on evidence presented below , ydiV was named cdgR for c-diGMP regulator . 
Generation of a new disruption in cdgR reproduced the phenotype of the transposon insertion , giving a competitive index in WT mice of 0.11 ± 0.11 ( mean ± SD , n = 5 ) for DcdgR : : CmR versus 0.10 ± 0.05 for AR5 ( mean ± SD , n = 5 ) . 
Infection of WT and phoxgp91 -- / -- C57BL/6 mice with a DydiU : : CmR strain established that ydiU was not required for virulence that the complemented mutant produced CdgR . 
However , the complemented mutant overproduced CdgR ( Fig. 1D ) . 
This provided us with the opportunity to study congenic strains of Stm expressing either no CdgR , physiologic levels or supraphysiologic levels . 
Stm strains with mutations in SPI-2 are hypersusceptible to the anti-bacterial action of phox in vivo even though they resist ROI normally in vitro ( Vazquez-Torres et al. , 2000b ; Gallois et al. , 2001 ) . 
In contrast , the cdgR mutant was more susceptible to the bactericidal action of H2O2 in vitro than the WT or complemented strains ( Fig. 2A and B ) . 
The protective role of cdgR appeared to be relatively speciﬁc for ROI , as the cdgR mutant did not show increased susceptibility to inhibition by acid ( Fig. 2C and D ) or killing by acidiﬁed NaNO2 ( Fig. 2E ) or SDS ( not shown ) . 
A 
B 
-- / -- 
-- / -- 
-- / -- 
-- / -- 
C 
D 
-- / -- 
Fig. 1 . 
The ydiV locus is required for growth of Stm in mice with functional gp91phox . 
A. Competitive index of mixed infection of mice with WT Stm together with AR5 or AR6 mutants . 
AR5 is disrupted in ydiV and AR6 in ytfN . 
Means ± SD for ﬁve mice in each of three experiments where marked ( * ) or in one experiment otherwise . 
B. Map of ydiV locus , where a transposon inserted in codon 121 or 122 to generate the mutant AR5 . 
C. Competitive index of mixed infection of mice with WT Stm together with AR5 , ydiU or AR6 mutants . 
In ( A ) and ( C ) , AR6 is included as a control . 
D. Western blot of WT ( W ) , cdgR ( ydiV ) mutant ( M ) and complemented ( C ) Stm and the attenuated Stm strain LT2 with antibody raised against CdgR fusion protein . 
( Fig. 1C ) . 
Moreover , complementation of AR5 with cdgR expressed from a low-copy plasmid restored the mutant 's ability to compete with WT Stm in WT mice , with a competitive index of 1.1 ± 0.5 for the complemented cdgR mutant versus WT bacteria and 0.09 ± 0.03 for noncomplemented cdgR versus WT bacteria in the same studies . 
Thus , cdgR , rather than ydiU or any gene that may have been mutated coincidentally , controls resistance of Stm to phox . 
To characterize the expression of cdgR in vitro , we fused lacZYA to the cdgR promoter on the chromosome . 
Production of b-galactosidase , and by inference CdgR , was maximal in late log phase/early stationary phase ( not shown ) . 
Late log phase Stm were used in all subsequent experiments . 
Immunoblot of bacterial lysates conﬁrmed that the AR5 strain lacked detectable CdgR protein and 
Culture denisity ( A600 ) 
Culture denisity ( A600 ) 
cfu ml -- 1 
Culture denisity ( A600 ) 
B 
A 
Culture denisity ( A600 
D 
E 
C 
Time ( h ) 
Fig. 2 . 
Impact of cdgR mutation on susceptibility of Stm to H2O2 , acid or nitrite . 
Late log phase cultures of Stm were diluted 1:100 into LB and incubated at 37 ∞ C with agitation in culture broth alone ( LB ) or with ( A and B ) 2 mM H2O2 ; ( C and D ) pH 4.0 or ( E ) varying concentrations of NaNO2 at pH 5.5 . 
A. Optical density ( A600 ) of cultures grown in 250 ml Erlenmeyer ﬂasks after overnight exposure . 
Means ± SD from three experiments . 
B. cfu of cultures grown in 96-well plates after 0 or 3 h. Means ± SD from two experiments , with one to three replicates in each experiment . 
C -- E. Optical density ( A600 ) of cultures grown in 96-well plates . 
Error bars show SD of triplicates in a representative experiment . 
C. Initial growth over cultures in LB , pH 4.0 . 
Wild type , squares ; cdgR mutant , circles ; pH 7.0 , closed symbols ; pH 4.0 , open symbols . 
D and E. Growth after overnight exposure to stresses . 
A , D and E. WT , black bars ; cdgR mutant , grey bars ; complemented mutant , striped bars . 
Accelerated destruction of macrophages by cdgR-deﬁcient Stm 
Next , we examined the impact of cdgR on the interaction of Stm with periodate-activated primary mouse macroph-ages . 
We observed rapid lysis of activated macrophages by WT Stm at an moi of 2 when the Stm was in late log phase ( Fig. 3A and B ) , but no killing within the same time by Stm in stationary phase ( not shown ) . 
Strikingly , CdgR-deﬁcient Stm killed macrophages even faster and more extensively than WT Stm ( Fig. 3A and B ) , lysing ~ 70 % of the macrophages within 90 min in most experiments and almost all of them by 2 h ( not shown ) . 
Equally striking , overexpression of CdgR abolished Stm 's cytolytic effect . 
A mixture of the cdgR mutant and the hypercomplemented strain killed macrophages as well as the cdgR mutant alone ( Fig. 3C ) . 
Thus , the hypercomplemented strain does not inhibit macrophage death but instead lacks the ability to cause it . 
Killing of Stm by heat or antibiotics abrogated cytotoxicity ( not shown ) , consistent 
Salmonella pathogenesis and c-diGMP 1237 with the notion that induction of macrophage death was an active process on Stm 's part . 
Inhibition of macrophage actin polymerization with cytochalasin D prevented rapid Stm-induced macrophage death ( Fig. 4A ) , suggesting that the bacteria had to be internalized in order to kill . 
Consistent with this , opsonization of Stm with serum accelerated macrophage death , but was not required ( not shown ) . 
Resident peritoneal macrophages , macrophages activated in vivo by periodate and macrophages activated in vitro by interferon-g were all comparably susceptible to rapid killing by cdgR-deﬁcient Stm ( Fig. 4B ) . 
The state of macrophage activation controls the activity of phox ( Nathan and Root , 1977 ) . 
Thus , the equivalent susceptibility of macrophages in different states of activation suggested that the Stm-infected macrophages did not die from overstimulation of phox . 
In fact , phox played no role in the death of the macrophages , as phox-deﬁcient cells underwent rapid cell death upon infection by cdgR mutant Stm ( Fig. 4C ) . 
Nor was NOS2 required for rapid death of the macrophages , as the resident macrophages illustrated in Fig. 2E contained no NOS2 . 
However , to kill macrophages , Stm required expression of sipB ( Fig. 4D ) but not SPI-2 ( not shown ) . 
Supernatant transfer experiments could not detect any factor released by co-culture of cdgR-deﬁcient Stm and macrophages that could kill uninfected macrophages or macrophages infected with the hypercomplemented Stm ( Figs S1 -- S3 ) . 
A 
B 
C 
Fig. 3 . 
cdgR restrains Stm from killing macrophages . 
A. Photomicrographs of monolayers of periodate-elicited mouse peritoneal macrophages 90 min after infection with opsonized , late log phase Stm that were WT , cdgR-deﬁcient , or hypercomplemented . 
20 ¥ objective . 
B. Lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) release from Stm-infected macrophages as a measure of lysis . 
Means ± SD for triplicates in 1 of 15 similar experiments . 
* P < 0.01 for mutant versus WT in this experiment and P < 10-6 for all 15 experiments by two-tailed Student 's t-test . 
C . 
In mixtures of cdgR-deﬁcient and hypercomplemented Stm , the rapid killing phenotype dominates . 
Mixed infection with 1:1 ratio of cdgR mutant : complemented mutant . 
Mixed 1 ¥ represents the same total moi as infection with one strain ( 2:1 ) , but only half as much of each individual strain . 
Mixed 2 ¥ represents twice the total moi used for infection with one strain ( 4:1 ) , but the same number of bacteria from each individual strain as used for infection with one strain . 
Values are means for triplicates ± SD . 
Panel is representative of two independent experiments . 
Fig. 4 . 
Characterization of cdgR-suppressed S. typhimurium killing of macrophages . 
A. Cytotoxicity depends on bacterial uptake . 
Macrophages were pre-treated with dimethylsulphoxide ( DMSO ; vehicle control ) or cytochalasin D for 30 min before infection . 
Toxicity is expressed as percentage lysis = ( Exp LDH ) / ( maximum LDH release ) ¥ 100 . 
B. Stm lacking CdgR are comparably cytotoxic to activated and non-activated macrophages . 
Resident peritoneal macrophages were infected identically to periodate-elicited macrophages . 
Twenty-four hours before infection , IFN-g ( 1000 units ml-1 ) was added to speciﬁed wells containing resident peritoneal macrophages . 
IFN-g was demonstrated to activate macrophages by the presence of nitrite in the supernatant at the time of infection ( data not shown ) . 
C. Cytotoxicity does not require phox . 
Periodate-elicited macrophages were isolated from WT C57Bl/6 mice or gp91phox -- / -- mice . 
D. Cytotoxicity depends on sipB . 
Macrophages were infected with late log phase cultures of Stm disrupted in cdgR and/or sipB . 
Values in all panels are means for triplicates ± SD and are representative of at least two independent experiments . 
Lack of evidence for transcriptional regulatory interactions between cdgR and SPI-1 
The increased macrophage killing by cdgR-deﬁcient Stm was sipB-dependent but SPI-2-independent . 
Thus , one might anticipate that suppression of macrophage killing by cdgR was exerted at the level of SPI-1 . 
To test for interactions of cdgR with SPI-1 genes , we asked whether cdgR affected expression of the SPI-1-related gene sipC and whether hilA , a master regulator of SPI-1 , controls expression of cdgR . 
Judging from expression of promoter -- reporter constructs , deletion of cdgR did not affect expression of sipC , nor did deletion of hilA affect expression of cdgR ( Fig. 5 ) . 
Moreover , SDS-PAGE analysis of proteins secreted by WT , cdgR mutant , and complemented mutant strains indicated that overexpression of CdgR partly suppressed but did not abolish secretion of SipB , and levels of SipB secreted by WT and cdgR mutant bacteria appeared equivalent ( not shown ) . 
In sum , we found no evidence for an interaction between SP1 genes and cdgR at the level of transcriptional regulation . 
There remains the possibility that CdgR may exert a posttranscriptional inﬂuence on SPI-1 genes . 
Mechanism of action of CdgR
Bioinformatic analysis of cdgR identiﬁed homologues in several Gram-negative species , but none with assigned functions . 
The conserved domain architecture retrieval 
Salmonella pathogenesis and c-diGMP 1239 tool ( cdart ) gave a statistically weak indication ( Evalue = 10-4-10-20 ) that cdgR might encode a glutamate-alanine-leucine ( EAL ) domain . 
EAL domains are stretches of ~ 215 amino acids with a few acidic residues of conserved spacing ( Galperin et al. , 2001 ) . 
Of the eponymous tripeptide , CdgR contains only the conserved glutamate . 
Nonetheless , computational predictions of CdgR 's secondary structure demonstrated that CdgR consists solely of an EAL domain ( Fig. 6A ) , an unusual situation among EAL domain-containing proteins . 
The threading programs 123D + , 3D-PSSM , FUGUE , GENTHREADER and UCLA/DOE FOLD SERVER predicted that CdgR folds to form an a/b or TIM barrel , a fold found in ~ 10 % of enzymes ( Nagano et al. , 2002 ) . 
Active site residues in TIM barrels are generally located at the carboxy-termini of b-strands ( Anantharaman et al. , 2003 ) . 
The corresponding residues in CdgR are those most highly conserved between CdgR and canonical EAL domains ( Fig. 6A ) . 
Because EAL domains have been speculated to function as c-diGMP phosphodiesterases ( Fig. 6B ) ( Galperin et al. , 2001 ; Simm et al. , 2004 ) , we tested the hypotheses that unmanipulated Stm contains c-diGMP and that physiologic levels of an EAL domain protein regulate the levels of c-diGMP . 
C-diGMP was synthesized ( average mass 690.4 ) and used to devise a sensitive , selective mass spectrometry-based assay . 
Synthetic c-diGMP eluted as a sharp peak on HPLC using microcapillary hydrophilic interaction chromatography ( HILIC ) and liquid chromatog-raphy-electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry ( LC-ESI-MS ) detection . 
The precursor [ M+H ] + ion had m / z = 691.05 ( Fig. 7A ) and when subjected to tandem mass spectrometry in a quadrupole ion trap had two predominant fragment ions at m/z = 540 and 248 ( Fig. 7B ) . 
Protein from lysates of late log phase Stm cultures was precipitated with methanol/chloroform ( Wessel and Flugge , 1984 ) and the aqueous phase subjected to LC-ESI-MS using selected reaction monitoring of the m/z = 691 precursor ion and the m/z = 540 product ion formed from the loss of a single guanine residue . 
For comparison , a boiled lysate of Stm was spiked with a known quantity of c-diGMP ( Fig. 7C ) . 
In WT Stm , c-diGMP was readily detect-able ( Fig. 7D ) at about 8.4 molecules per cell . 
In Stm lacking CdgR , the c-diGMP concentration was about sevenfold higher ( Fig. 7E ) . 
The c-diGMP in the complemented mutant was similar in level to that in WT ( Fig. 7F ) . 
Thus , c-diGMP is a physiologic constituent of Stm and is controlled by physiologic levels of CdgR . 
A 
Normalized units b-gal activity/A60 
Units b-gal activity/A600 
Time ( h ) after dilution 
B 
Time ( h ) after dilution 
Fig. 5 . 
Lack of evidence for transcriptional regulatory interactions between cdgR and SPI-1 . 
Bacteria containing either a cdgR -- lacZYA construct or a sipC : : Tn5 -- lacZYA construct were diluted 1:100 from overnight cultures into LB and grown at 37 ∞ C with aeration . 
At indicated time points bacteria were lysed and soluble fractions evaluated for units of b-galactosidase activity as a measure of transcription from either the cdgR or the sip operon promoter . 
A. Expression of cdgR is not inﬂuenced by hilA , the master regulator of SPI-1 , but is regulated by a mechanism that is absent in the strain LT2 . 
The cdgR -- lacZYA fusion was transduced into different Stm strains . 
Values represent the mean of four samples ± SD , and are representative of two independent experiments . 
B. CdgR does not appear to contribute to regulation of the sip operon , which encodes SPI-1 effector molecules . 
The strain BJ68 contains a copy of the lacZYA operon inserted within sipC . 
The cdgR mutation was transduced into BJ68 . 
Values for units b-galactosidase activity / A600 were normalized in order to compare trends in independent experiments . 
Values represent the mean of three independent experiments ± SD . 
Discussion
Bacterial signal transduction mainly uses phosphorelays and cyclic adenosine monophosphate ( cAMP ) . 
An early report that Escherichia coli contains cGMP ( Macchia et al. , 1975 ) did not lead to clear-cut evidence for a functional role ( Hurley , 2003 ) . 
In contrast , a role for c-diGMP has been emerging , ﬁrst in the regulation of cellulose synthesis ( Ross et al. , 1987 ) and then in bioﬁlm formation and motility ( D'Argenio and Miller , 2004 ; Jenal , 2004 ) . 
This new frontier in bacterial signal transduction was opened by the discovery that two proteins puriﬁed from the a-proteobacterium Acetobacter xylinum ( Gluconacetobacter xylinus ) that contribute to cellulose synthesis regulation each contained an EAL domain and a GGDEF domain , and that one catalysed the synthesis of c-diGMP in vitro , while the other acted in vitro as a c-diGMP phosphodiesterase ( Tal et al. , 1998 ) . 
PleD , a multidomain protein in Caulobacter crescentus that includes a GGDEF domain but not an EAL domain , acted in vitro as a digua-nylate cyclase ( Paul et al. , 2004 ) , while disruption of a gene encoding a protein that includes an EAL domain led to appearance of a c-diGMP-like molecule in Vibrio chol-erae ( Tischler et al. , 2002 ) . 
Moreover , overexpression of a GGDEF domain-containing protein in Stm led to the appearance of detectable c-diGMP in a dose-dependent manner , and overexpression of an EAL domain protein counteracted this effect ( Simm et al. , 2004 ) . 
Most of the annotated genes encoding EAL and/or GGDEF domains in Gram-negative bacteria regulate exopolysaccharide production , bioﬁlm formation and/or bacterial motility ( Jenal , 2004 ; Simm et al. , 2004 ; Tischler and Camilli , 2004 ) . 
In some of these reports , however , the contribution of c-diGMP to signal transduction has been based on two assumptions : that changes in levels of c-diGMP and bacterial phenotypes seen after manipulation of genes that encode GGDEF and EAL domains reﬂect physiologic signalling occurring in WT bacteria ; and that EAL domain proteins break down c-diGMP . 
There have been three major technical obstacles to validating these assumptions : limited availability of authentic c-diGMP as a standard ; lack of speciﬁcity and/or sensitivity of assays to detect it ; and the circumstance that GGDEF and EAL domains often appear together in the same proteins , and almost always along with other domains germane to signal transduction that might inﬂuence the bacterial phenotype under study . 
The present study adds to knowledge of c-diGMP in bacterial signal transduction in the following ways : by devising an assay sensitive enough to detect and quantify c-diGMP in unmanipulated bacteria and in a loss-of-function mutant ; by studying a gene that encodes nothing but an EAL domain ; and by discovering that c-diGMP inﬂuences virulence mechanisms of a bacterial pathogen , namely , resistance to hydrogen peroxide and the ability to kill macrophages . 
This study appears to be the ﬁrst to quantify c-diGMP in genetically unmanipulated bacteria . 
We found that Stm , an enterobacterium pathogenic for humans and mice , contains at least eight copies of c-diGMP per cell under standard growth conditions . 
This is likely an underestimate , as we assayed only the soluble fraction of the bacterial lysates , and some c-diGMP may be sequestered at the bacterial membrane ( Paul et al. , 2004 ) or may have been lost during cellular fractionation . 
Disruption of cdgR led to an increase in levels of soluble c-diGMP . 
Because the protein encoded by cdgR consists solely of an EAL domain , the latter observation lends support to the hypothesis that EAL domains can act as c-diGMP phosphodiesterases . 
However , direct biochemical evidence is still lacking for c-diGMP phosphodiesterase activity exhibited by a pure EAL domain in vitro and its inhibition by point mutations in the presumptive active site . 
The prep-arations of recombinant CdgR fusion protein used in this study as a source of antigen did not exhibit c-diGMP phosphodiesterase activity in vitro ( not shown ) . 
This may have resulted from interference by the fusion tag ; dena-turation of the protein during puriﬁcation ; lack of suitable assay conditions ; co-dependence of c-diGMP phosphod-iesterase activity on another protein along with CdgR , such as a regulatory subunit ; or indirect regulation of c-diGMP by CdgR , such as through induction of a phosphodiesterase . 
CdgR controls diverse functions relevant to the host -- pathogen interaction . 
Those addressed in the present report are resistance to H2O2 in vitro and to phox in mice , and the killing of macrophages by a process dependent in part on SipB . 
Lacking cdgR , Stm killed macrophages with extraordinary speed and efﬁciency . 
The tempo , extent and mechanisms of Stm-dependent macrophage death are highly variable in different reports ( Table S3 ) . 
The diversity of experimental outcomes in macrophage -- Stm encounters may be explicable in part by differences in expression of cdgR due to growth conditions or mutations in cdgR-regulatory factors . 
For example , LT2 , an attenuated Stm strain found to kill macrophages extremely quickly ( Jesenberger et al. , 2000 ) , did not express cdgR ( Fig. 5A ) . 
However , cdgR deﬁciency in LT2 is not attribut-able solely to that strain 's rpoS deﬁciency ( data not shown ) , and it is not clear whether cdgR deﬁciency contributes to attenuation of LT2 . 
We discovered cdgR through its contribution to survival of Stm in the mouse , speciﬁcally through the ability of cdgR to help Stm resist phox . 
Although CdgR mediates Stm-induced macrophage death , rapid , SPI-1-dependent lysis of macrophages by Stm is thought to occur primarily in the intestinal mucosa following oral infection ( Galan and Curtiss , 1989 ; Monack et al. , 2000 ) . 
In the present study , mice were infected parenterally , conditions in which SPI-1 was unlikely to be induced . 
However , it is possible that disruption of cdgR may foster the inducibility of SPI-1 during systemic infection . 
Thus , it is entirely speculative whether accelerated , SPI-1-dependent cytotoxicity against macrophages on the part of the cdgR mutant may have contributed to its attenuation , for example , by releasing bacteria from dying macrophages and exposing them to antibody , complement and neutrophils before their extensive replication . 
It seems more likely that the contribution of cdgR to virulence of WT Stm largely results from the regulation of an antioxidant defence , as demonstrated by reversal of attenuation of the cdgR mutant in phox-deﬁcient mice . 
The CdgR amino acid sequence bears no resemblance to sequences of known antioxidant enzymes . 
Therefore , the impact of cdgR on resistance of Stm to H2O2 probably reﬂects its inﬂuence on the expression of another gene . 
However , the cdgR mutation did not alter expression of the two principle H O resistance enzymes in Stm , alkyl-2 2 hydroperoxide reductase and catalase ( not shown ) ( Seaver and Imlay , 2001 ) . 
Identiﬁcation of the antioxidant mechanism of CdgR is the subject of ongoing studies . 
CdgR is one of 18 EAL domains in the Stm genome , yet the others did not compensate for CdgR 's absence . 
This supports the proposal that most of the Stm enzymes that produce and degrade c-diGMP operate in microenvironments , as is the case for cAMP in eukaryotic cells ( Rich et al. , 2001 ) . 
In support of this concept , a diguanylate cyclase affecting polar differentiation in C. crescentus was found to be tethered to speciﬁc locations in the bacterial membrane ( Paul et al. , 2004 ) . 
In the present study , sequestration of CdgR at the membrane may have prevented it from acting on the total cellular pool of c-diGMP , perhaps explaining why overexpression of CdgR had a more exaggerated impact on the phenotype of Stm than on global levels of c-diGMP . 
Alternatively , as for c-diGMP cyclases ( Paul et al. , 2004 ) , post-translational modiﬁcation of c-diGMP phosphodiesterases may be required for proper enzymatic function . 
In the absence of a concomitant increase in levels of potential activating enzymes , some proportion of the overexpressed CdgR molecules may not have been activated . 
In sum , the present ﬁndings that an EAL domain protein contributes to bacterial virulence and the frequent linkage of EAL and/or GGDEF domains with sensor domains such as PAS , FliY and CheY ( Galperin et al. , 2001 ; Paul et al. , 2004 ; Simm et al. , 2004 ) add to the evidence that c-diGMP may transduce numerous signals in eubacteria and plants ( Amor et al. , 1991 ) , as cGMP does in vertebrates . 
A 
PSIPRED VieA CdgR PSIPRED 
PSIPRED VieA CdgR PSIPRED 
PSIPRED VieA CdgR PSIPRED 
B 
Fig. 6 . 
CdgR encodes an EAL domain . 
A. Secondary structure predictions . 
The two middle rows indicate the amino acid sequences of VieA , a canonical EAL domain from V. cholera , and CdgR . 
VieA is part of a three-component regulatory system required for regulation of bioﬁlm formation . 
The secondary structure program PSIPRED was used to predict the arrangement of a-helices and b-sheets in VieA ( top rows ) and in CdgR ( bottom rows ) . 
In tops and bottom rows : grey C , random coil ; green E , b-sheet ; blur H , a-helix . 
Four other independent secondary structure algorithms ( PHD , SAM-T99 , SSPRO , 3D-PSSM ) produced similar parallel structure alignments for VieA and CdgR . 
Grey ` H 's and ` E 's represent stretches in the PSIPRED predictions that did not agree with the structures predicted by the other four algorithms . 
Coloured residues in the CdgR amino acid sequence indicate : identity/similarity of residues between CdgR and 100 % of EAL domain sequences ( magenta text ) , 95 % of EAL domain sequences ( Red text ) , and 90 % of EAL domain sequences ( orange text ) . 
Lack of conservation of residues in CdgR that are conserved in other EAL domains : conserved in 90 % ( forest green text ) or 95 % ( cyan text ) of other EAL domain sequences but not in CdgR . 
B. Molecular structure of cyclic diguanylate ( c-diGMP ) and actions of diguanylate cyclase and c-diGMP phosphodiesterase . 
Fig. 7 . 
Wild-type Stm contain c-diGMP and CdgR acts physiologically to suppress its level . 
A. Liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization ( LC-ESI ) mass spectrum of synthetic c-diGMP in positive ion mode . 
B. Tandem mass spectrum of c-diGMP after applying selected ion monitoring for species with m/z = 691 to the LC gradient used in ( A ) , revealing guanine-loss fragment at m/z = 540 . 
C -- F. Tandem LC-ESI-MS on Stm extracts performed as in ( A ) and ( B ) . 
C. Lysate was boiled to inactivate phosphodiesterases , then spiked with c-diGMP before extraction . 
D. Extract of WT Stm . 
E. Extract of cdgR mutant . 
F. Extract of complemented mutant . 
AUC , area under the curve expressed in ion counts for peak corresponding to c-diGMP . 
Experimental procedures
Mice
Wild-type and NOS2 -- / -- mice were from Charles River Laboratories , Taconic , Jackson Laboratories or our colonies of NOS2 -- / -- ( MacMicking et al. , 1995 ) , phoxgp91 -- / -- ( Pollock et al. , 1995 ) and phoxgp91 -- / -- NOS2 -- / -- mice ( Shiloh et al. , 1999 ) . 
All mice were C57BL/6 or backcrossed to C57BL/6 mice for at least six generations . 
Bacterial strains and infections
STM mutants were derived from the parental strain Stm 12023 ( 14028 ) with nalidixic acid resistance ( 14028R ) ( Hensel et al. , 1995 ) . 
Stm SL1344 is the parent strain for clone BJ68 , which contains the lacZYA reporter inserted in the sipC gene ( Penheiter et al. , 1997 ) , and the hilA deletion mutant ( Bajaj et al. , 1995 ) . 
Targeted mutations were made in WT Stm as described ( Datsenko and Wanner , 2000 ) . 
Mutations and reporter constructs were transferred between strains by transduction . 
Bacteria were grown in Luria -- Bertani ( LB ) broth or on LB agar plates . 
Transposon-tagged Stm pools in 96-well microtitre plates were grown overnight , re-inoculated into a fresh plate and grown with shaking at 37 ∞ C to early log phase ( OD ~ 0.2 ) , 580 pooled , collected by centrifugation , diluted to 5 ¥ 105 cfu ml-1 in sterile saline and injected intraperitoneally ( 105 cfu per mouse ) . 
Two WT mice were injected per pool in the ﬁrst round . 
Spleens were removed 3 days later , homogenized and serially diluted on LB-kanamycin-nalidixic acid plates . 
New pools were enriched for attenuated mutants at a ratio of 1:2 to virulent mutants and injected into four mice of each strain . 
Wild-type and NOS2 -- / -- mice got 105 cfu and were sacriﬁced at day 3 . 
Phoxgp91 -- / -- and phoxgp91 -- / -- NOS2 -- / -- got 104 cfu and were sacriﬁced at day 2 ; they would not survive 3 days . 
Genomic DNA from input and recovered pools of Stm was transferred to nylon membranes ( NEN ) for hybridization with radiolabelled probes for the tag . 
Colonies of interest were identiﬁed by autoradiography and their genomic DNA digested within the mini-Tn5 transposon multiple cloning site ( Herrero et al. , 1990 ; de Lorenzo et al. , 1990 ) . 
Restriction fragments were cloned into pBluescript SK ( + ) vector for sequence analysis . 
Some transposon sites were identiﬁed by an alternative method ( see SOM ) . 
For competition experiments ( Beuzon and Holden , 2001 ) , Stm 12023 and individual STM mutant strains were inoculated from overnight cultures into LB at a dilution of 1:100 , grown for 1.5 -- 2 h to early log phase ( A ~ 0.2 -- 0.4 ) , pelleted , 600 resuspended in 0.9 % sterile saline , mixed 1:1 and diluted to deliver 103 cfu per mouse intravenously . 
At indicated times cfu were determined in serial dilutions from homogenized spleens plated on LB containing nalidixic acid with or without kanamycin to enumerate STM mutants alone or total number of Stm respectively . 
Competitive index was determined as described ( Beuzon and Holden , 2001 ) . 
Infection of macrophages
Periodate-activated ( or where indicated , resident ) peritoneal macrophages were collected as before ( Ding et al. , 1988 ) ¥ 5 and cultured at 5 10 cells per well in 96-well plates in DMEM with 10 % heat-inactivated fetal calf serum ( FCS ) , 1 mM sodium pyruvate , 2 mM L-glutamine , 100 U ml-1 penicillin G and 100 mg ml-1 streptomycin . 
The following day , non-adherent cells and antibiotic-containing media were removed , the monolayers washed twice with PBS and wells replenished with DMEM containing 1 % heat-inactivated FCS and 1 mM sodium pyruvate . 
Assays were performed on the following day . 
Cells were washed twice with pre-warmed PBS and wells replenished with 200 ml of Krebs Ringer phosphate plus glucose ( KRPG ) ( De la Harpe and Nathan , 1985 ) . 
Bacteria were diluted 1:100 into LB , grown for 5.5 h to late log/early stationary phase ( A600 ~ 3 -- 4 ) , resuspended in 0.9 % saline , diluted 1:50 , opsonized in 10 % heat-inactivated mouse serum for 30 min at 37 ∞ C with rotation , resuspended in 0.9 % saline and dispensed at ~ 106 bacteria added per well for an moi of 2:1 . 
Plates were centrifuged at 250 g for 5 min at room temperature and incubated 10 min at 37 ∞ C to allow phagocytosis . 
This was designated time 0 ( t0 ) . 
Supernatant was recovered from one to plate to measure lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) release ( Cytotoxicity Detection Kit , Roche Molecular Biochemicals ) . 
At designated time points , macrophages were lysed with 0.5 % Triton and dilutions plated on LB agar to determine bacterial uptake . 
Remaining plates were given gentamicin ( 10 mg ml-1 ) . 
At 90 min , per cent cytotoxicity was determined in triplicate as ( LDH released from experimental wells -- LDH released from uninfected control wells ) / ( maximum LDH released -- LDH released from uninfected control wells ) ¥ 100 , where maximum release was established with 0.5 % Triton . 
Error bars represent a weighted measure of variability as follows : the standard deviation for LDH released from triplicate wells was divided by the mean LDH released , and this ratio was multiplied by the calculated percentage cytotoxicity . 
Alternatively , at t0 or t90 , macrophages were washed twice in phosphate-buffered saline and lysed in 1 N NaOH to measure remaining cell protein . 
Bacteria were exposed to deﬁned stresses in vitro at 37 ∞ C in 96-well microtitre plates with agitation and survival was assessed by A600 or cfu determination . 
Immunoblots
cdgR was cloned by polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) from Stm chromosomal DNA . 
The His6 fusion protein was puriﬁed from transformed E. coli ER2566 by Ni-NTA agarose chroma-tography and SDS-PAGE . 
The band at ~ 25 kDa was used to raise a rabbit antiserum , which was adsorbed with acetone powders of Stm cdgR mutant ( SCN19 ) and E. coli ER2566 . 
Bacteria were sonicated on ice . 
Cytosolic and membrane fractions were separated by centifugation . 
Soluble proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted . 
Bound antibody was detected by enhanced chemiluminescence ( Pierce ) . 
Transcriptional fusion constructs
Chromosomal lacZYA fusion reporters were constructed using the integrating plasmid pFUSE ( Baumler et al. , 1996 ) to included part of the upstream gene , the intervening region , and a portion of the 5 cents region of the gene of interest . 
For analysis of sip operon expression , strain BJ68 was used ( Penheiter et al. , 1997 ) . 
Gene expression was quantiﬁed by b-galactosidase activity ( Miller , 1972 ) . 
Synthesis and quantiﬁcation of c-diGMP
C-di-GMP was synthesized via standard phosphoramidite coupling followed by H-phosphonate cyclization ( Zeng and Jones , 1996 ) , puriﬁed by RP-HPLC , and converted to the sodium form by ion exchange chromatography . 
Overnight Stm cultures were diluted 1:100 into 50 ml of LB broth + 100 g ml-1 carbenicillin in 500 ml ﬂasks . 
After 5.5 h at 37 ∞ C with agitation , bacteria were centrifuged at 4000 r.p.m. , 4 ∞ C for 30 min . 
Pellets were resuspended in 1 ml of 50 mM Tris , pH 8.0 , and sonicated on ice . 
Lysates were spun at 13 000 r.p.m. , 4 ∞ C for 30 min . 
One volume of supernatant containing 1.8 mg of protein was combined with 1 volume of chloroform , 4 volumes of methanol and 3 volumes of water . 
Samples were mixed , pelleted at 18 000 g for 5 min and the aqueous phase was frozen at -80 ∞ C. Samples were diluted 10-fold with acetonitrile and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis after HILIC on a microcapillary column made using a 100 mm internal diameter piece of fused silica capillary pulled to 5 mm at the tip with a butane/micronox torch . 
The column was packed with 10 cm length of 5 mm polyhydroxy-ethyl chromatography material ( PolyLC ) using a pressure bomb and placed in-line between an Agilent 1100 HPLC / autosampler ( Palo Alto , CA ) and a ThermoElectron LTQ linear ion trap mass spectrometer ( San Jose , CA ) using a mspray source constructed in-house . 
The sample ( 40 ml ) was loaded from the autosampler onto the microcapillary column using a 7 ml min-1 ﬂow of buffer A ( 80 % acetonitrile , 20 mM ammonium acetate ) . 
After 15 min of loading , the HPLC ﬂow was increased to 100 ml min-1 and split upstream of the column using the instrument 's divert valve to produce a 200 -- 500 nl min-1 ﬂow through the microcapillary column . 
The sample was displaced from the column using a gradient from 
0 to 100 % buffer B ( 20 mM ammonium acetate ) over 30 min . 
The HPLC efﬂuent was emitted into the mass spectrometer with the application of a distal +2.4 kV spray voltage . 
Data were acquired using selected reaction monitoring , where the ( M+H ) + precursor ion of c-diGMP ( m/z = 691 ) was isolated and the product ion from the loss of guanine ( m/z = 540 ) was monitored throughout the gradient . 
Acknowledgements
We thank J. Cyrkler , J. Roberts , H. Han , B. Rosenberg and L. Kiang for help with experiments and F. Fang for providing mutant strains . 
Mass spectroscopy work was initiated while M.M. was in the lab of J. Yates , Scripps Research Institute . 
This work was supported by NIH Grant HL61241 ( C.N. ) and EB002809 ( R.J. ) . 
K.H. was supported by NIH MSTP Grant GM07739 and the William Randolph Hearst Endowed Scholarship Fund for the Tri-Institutional MD/PhD Program . 
The Department of Microbiology and Immunology is supported by the William Randolph Hearst Foundation . 
Supplementary material
The following material is available from
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/products/journals/ suppmat/mmi/mmi4632/mmi4632sm.htm Table S1 . 
Salmonella typhimurium STM strains negatively selected in all mouse strains . 
Table S2 . 
Attenuation reversal ( AR ) mutants . 
Table S3 . 
Categories of Salmonella-induced macrophage death . 
Fig . 
S1 . 
Schematic of supernatant transfer experiment . 
Fig . 
S2 . 
Purpose of donor well manipulations evaluated in supernatant transfer experiment . 
Fig . 
S3 . 
Supernatants from cdgR mutant S. typhimurium or from cdgR mutant infected macrophages do not contain a soluble factor that induces rapid cell death . 
References 
Amor , Y. , Mayer , R. , Benziman , M. , and Delmer , D. ( 1991 ) Evidence for a cyclic diguanylic acid-dependent cellulose synthase in plants . 
Plant Cell 3 : 989 -- 995 . 
Anantharaman , V. , Aravind , L. , and Koonin , E.V. ( 2003 ) Emergence of diverse biochemical activities in evolutionarily conserved structural scaffolds of proteins . 
Curr Opin Chem Biol 7 : 12 -- 20 . 
Bajaj , V. , Hwang , C. , and Lee , C.A. ( 1995 ) hilA is a novel ompR/toxR family member that activates the expression of Salmonella typhimurium invasion genes . 
Mol Microbiol 18 : 715 -- 727 . 
Baumler , A.J. , Tsolis , R.M. , van der Velden , A.W. , Stojiljkovic , I. , Anic , S. , and Heffron , F. ( 1996 ) Identiﬁcation of a new iron regulated locus of Salmonella typhi . 
Gene 183 : 207 -- 213 . 
Beuzon , C.R. , and Holden , D.W. ( 2001 ) Use of mixed infections with Salmonella strains to study virulence genes and their interactions in vivo . 
Microbes Infect 3 : 1345 -- 1352 . 
Chen , L.M. , Kaniga , K. , and Galan , J.E. ( 1996 ) Salmonella spp . 
are cytotoxic for cultured macrophages . 
Mol Microbiol 21 : 1101 -- 1115 . 
D'Argenio , D.A. , and Miller , S.I. ( 2004 ) Cyclic di-GMP as a bacterial second messenger . 
Microbiology 150 : 2497 -- 2502 . 
Datsenko , K.A. , and Wanner , B.L. ( 2000 ) One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in Escherichia coli K-12 using PCR products . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97 : 6640 -- 6645 . 
De la Harpe , J. , and Nathan , C.F. ( 1985 ) A semi-automated micro-assay for H2O2 release by human blood monocytes and mouse peritoneal macrophages . 
J Immunol Methods 78 : 323 -- 336 . 
Ding , A.H. , Nathan , C.F. , and Stuehr , D.J. ( 1988 ) Release of reactive nitrogen intermediates and reactive oxygen intermediates from mouse peritoneal macrophages . 
Comparison of activating cytokines and evidence for independent production . 
J Immunol 141 : 2407 -- 2412 . 
Galan , J.E. , and Curtiss , R. , III ( 1989 ) Cloning and molecular characterization of genes whose products allow Salmo-nella typhimurium to penetrate tissue culture cells . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86 : 6383 -- 6387 . 
Gallois , A. , Klein , J.R. , Allen , L.A. , Jones , B.D. , and Nauseef , W.M. ( 2001 ) Salmonella pathogenicity island 2-encoded type III secretion system mediates exclusion of NADPH oxidase assembly from the phagosomal membrane . 
J Immunol 166 : 5741 -- 5748 . 
Galperin , M.Y. , Nikolskaya , A.N. , and Koonin , E.V. ( 2001 ) Novel domains of the prokaryotic two-component signal transduction systems . 
FEMS Microbiol Lett 203 : 11 -- 21 . 
Hensel , M. , Shea , J.E. , Gleeson , C. , Jones , M.D. , Dalton , E. , and Holden , D.W. ( 1995 ) Simultaneous identiﬁcation of bacterial virulence genes by negative selection . 
Science 269 : 400 -- 403 . 
Herrero , M. , de Lorenzo , V. , and Timmis , K.N. ( 1990 ) Transposon vectors containing non-antibiotic resistance selection markers for cloning and stable chromosomal insertion of foreign genes in gram-negative bacteria . 
J Bacteriol 172 : 6557 -- 6567 . 
Hersh , D. , Monack , D.M. , Smith , M.R. , Ghori , N. , Falkow , S. , and Zychlinsky , A. ( 1999 ) The Salmonella invasin SipB induces macrophage apoptosis by binding to caspase-1 . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 : 2396 -- 2401 . 
Hurley , J.H. ( 2003 ) GAF domains : cyclic nucleotides come full circle . 
Sci STKE 2003 : PE1 . 
Jenal , U. ( 2004 ) Cyclic di-guanosine-monophosphate comes of age : a novel secondary messenger involved in modulating cell surface structures in bacteria ? 
Curr Opin Microbiol 7 : 185 -- 191 . 
Jesenberger , V. , Procyk , K.J. , Yuan , J. , Reipert , S. , and Baccarini , M. ( 2000 ) Salmonella-induced caspase-2 activation in macrophages : a novel mechanism in pathogenmediated apoptosis . 
J Exp Med 192 : 1035 -- 1046 . 
de Lorenzo , V. , Herrero , M. , Jakubzik , U. , and Timmis , K.N. ( 1990 ) Mini-Tn5 transposon derivatives for insertion mutagenesis , promoter probing , and chromosomal insertion of cloned DNA in gram-negative eubacteria . 
J Bacteriol 172 : 6568 -- 6572 . 
Macchia , V. , Varrone , S. , Weissbach , H. , and Miller , D.L. ( 1975 ) Guanylate cyclase in Escherichia coli . 
Puriﬁcation and properties . 
J Biol Chem 250 : 6214 -- 6217 . 
MacMicking , J.D. , Nathan , C. , Hom , G. , Chartrain , N. , Fletcher , D.S. , Trumbauer , M. , et al. ( 1995 ) Altered responses to bacterial infection and endotoxic shock in mice lacking inducible nitric oxide synthase . 
Cell 81 : 641 -- 650 . 
Mastroeni , P. , Vazquez-Torres , A. , Fang , F.C. , Xu , Y. , Khan , S. , Hormaeche , C.E. , and Dougan , G. ( 2000 ) Antimicrobial actions of the NADPH phagocyte oxidase and inducible nitric oxide synthase in experimental salmonellosis . 
II . 
Effects on microbial proliferation and host survival in vivo . 
J Exp Med 192 : 237 -- 248 . 
Miller , J.H. ( 1972 ) Experiments in Molecular Genetics . 
Cold Spring Harbor , NY : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press . 
Monack , D.M. , Raupach , B. , Hromockyj , A.E. , and Falkow , S. ( 1996 ) Salmonella typhimurium invasion induces apoptosis in infected macrophages . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 : 9833 -- 9838 . 
Monack , D.M. , Hersh , D. , Ghori , N. , Bouley , D. , Zychlinsky , A. , and Falkow , S. ( 2000 ) Salmonella exploits caspase-1 to colonize Peyer 's patches in a murine typhoid model . 
J Exp Med 192 : 249 -- 258 . 
Nagano , N. , Orengo , C.A. , and Thornton , J.M. ( 2002 ) One fold with many functions : the evolutionary relationships between TIM barrel families based on their sequences , structures and functions . 
J Mol Biol 321 : 741 -- 765 . 
Nathan , C.F. , and Root , R.K. ( 1977 ) Hydrogen peroxide release from mouse peritoneal macrophages : dependence on sequential activation and triggering . 
J Exp Med 146 : 1648 -- 1662 . 
Paul , R. , Weiser , S. , Amiot , N.C. , Chan , C. , Schirmer , T. , Giese , B. , and Jenal , U. ( 2004 ) Cell cycle-dependent dynamic localization of a bacterial response regulator with a novel di-guanylate cyclase output domain . 
Genes Dev 18 : 715 -- 727 . 
Penheiter , K.L. , Mathur , N. , Giles , D. , Fahlen , T. , and Jones , B.D. ( 1997 ) Non-invasive Salmonella typhimurium mutants are avirulent because of an inability to enter and destroy M cells of ileal Peyer 's patches . 
Mol Microbiol 24 : 697 -- 709 . 
Pollock , J.D. , Williams , D.A. , Gifford , M.A. , Li , L.L. , Du , X. , Fisherman , J. , et al. ( 1995 ) Mouse model of X-linked chronic granulomatous disease , an inherited defect in phagocyte superoxide production . 
Nat Genet 9 : 202 -- 209 . 
Rich , T.C. , Fagan , K.A. , Tse , T.E. , Schaack , J. , Cooper , D.M. , and Karpen , J.W. ( 2001 ) A uniform extracellular stim ¬ 
ulus triggers distinct cAMP signals in different compartments of a simple cell . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98 : 13049 -- 13054 . 
Ross , P. , Weinhouse , H. , Aloni , Y. , Michaeli , D. , Weinberger-Ohana , P. , Mayer , R. , et al. ( 1987 ) Regulation of cellulose synthesis in Acetobacter xylinum by cyclic diguanylic acid . 
Nature 325 : 279 -- 281 . 
Seaver , L.C. , and Imlay , J.A. ( 2001 ) Hydrogen peroxide ﬂuxes and compartmentalization inside growing Escheri-chia coli . 
J Bacteriol 183 : 7182 -- 7189 . 
Shiloh , M.U. , MacMicking , J.D. , Nicholson , S. , Brause , J.E. , Potter , S. , Marino , M. , et al. ( 1999 ) Phenotype of mice and macrophages deﬁcient in both phagocyte oxidase and inducible nitric oxide synthase . 
Immunity 10 : 29 -- 38 . 
Simm , R. , Morr , M. , Kader , A. , Nimtz , M. , and Romling , U. ( 2004 ) GGDEF and EAL domains inversely regulate cyclic di-GMP levels and transition from sessility to motility . 
Mol Microbiol 53 : 1123 -- 1134 . 
Tal , R. , Wong , H.C. , Calhoon , R. , Gelfand , D. , Fear , A.L. , Volman , G. , et al. ( 1998 ) Three cdg operons control cellular turnover of cyclic di-GMP in Acetobacter xylinum : genetic organization and occurrence of conserved domains in isoenzymes . 
J Bacteriol 180 : 4416 -- 4425 . 
Tischler , A.D. , and Camilli , A. ( 2004 ) Cyclic diguanylate ( c-di-GMP ) regulates Vibrio cholerae bioﬁlm formation . 
Mol Microbiol 53 : 857 -- 869 . 
Tischler , A.D. , Lee , S.H. , and Camilli , A. ( 2002 ) The Vibrio cholerae vieSAB locus encodes a pathway contributing to cholera toxin production . 
J Bacteriol 184 : 4104 -- 4113 . 
Vazquez-Torres , A. , Jones-Carson , J. , Mastroeni , P. , Ischiropoulos , H. , and Fang , F.C. ( 2000a ) Antimicrobial actions of the NADPH phagocyte oxidase and inducible nitric oxide synthase in experimental salmonellosis . 
I. Effects on microbial killing by activated peritoneal macrophages in vitro . 
J Exp Med 192 : 227 -- 236 . 
Vazquez-Torres , A. , Xu , Y. , Jones-Carson , J. , Holden , D.W. , Lucia , S.M. , Dinauer , M.C. , et al. ( 2000b ) Salmonella pathogenicity island 2-dependent evasion of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase . 
Science 287 : 1655 -- 1658 . 
Wessel , D. , and Flugge , U.I. ( 1984 ) A method for the quantitative recovery of protein in dilute solution in the presence of detergents and lipids . 
Anal Biochem 138 : 141 -- 143 . 
Zeng , F. , and Jones , R. ( 1996 ) Synthesis of cyclic dinucle-otides by an H-phosphonate method in solution . 
Nucleosides Nucleotides 15 : 1679 -- 1686 .