Functional reconstitution of the Salmonella typhimurium PhoQ histidine kinase sensor in proteoliposomes
Two-component signal-transduction systems are widespread in bacteria . 
They are usually composed of a transmembrane histidine kinase sensor and a cytoplasmic response regulator . 
The PhoP/PhoQ two-component system of Salmonella typhimurium contributes to virulence by co-ordinating the adaptation to low concentrations of environmental Mg2 + . 
Limiting concentrations of extracellular Mg2 + activate the PhoP/PhoQ phosphorylation cascade modulating the transcription of PhoP-regulated genes . 
In contrast , high concentrations of extracellular Mg2 + stimulate the dephosphorylation of the response regulator PhoP by the PhoQ kinase sensor . 
In the present study , we report the puriﬁcation and functional reconstitution of PhoQHis , a PhoQ variant with a Cterminal His tag , into Escherichia coli liposomes . 
The functionality of PhoQHis was essentially similar to that of PhoQ as shown in vivo and in vitro . 
Puriﬁed PhoQHis was inserted into lipo ¬ 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, 3775 University Street, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4
INTRODUCTION
Two-component regulatory systems are used by bacteria to sense and respond to a variety of environmental signals , usually by modulating the expression of speciﬁc genes . 
Prototypical two-component systems consist of a transmembrane histidine kinase sensor that detects speciﬁc environmental signals and a cytoplasmic response regulator that elicits the cellular response [ 1,2 ] . 
Signal transduction across the cytoplasmic membrane modulates an intracellular phosphorylation cascade [ 3,4 ] . 
The kinase sensor autophosphorylates in an ATP-dependent manner on a highly conserved histidine residue of its cytoplasmic catalytic domain . 
Subsequently , the phosphoryl group is transferred from the histidine residue to an invariant aspartic residue of the res-ponse regulator receiver domain . 
In turn , this affects the DNA-binding properties of the response regulator effector domain . 
Most kinase sensors also possess a phosphatase activity that allows the dephosphorylation of the response regulator . 
The balance between the autokinase and phosphatase activities of the kinase sensor controls the net phosphorylation of the response regulator [ 5 -- 7 ] . 
In Salmonella typhimurium , the PhoP/PhoQ two-component system is composed of the PhoQ histidine kinase sensor and the PhoP response regulator . 
It controls the expression of more than 40 genes in response to changes in the extracellular concentrations of bivalent cations such as Mg2 + , Ca2 + and Mn2 + [ 8 ] . 
It has been proposed that Mg2 + acts as the physiologically relevant signal controlling the PhoP/PhoQ system [ 9 ] . 
Limiting concentrations of extracellular Mg2 + ( µM range ) activate the PhoP/PhoQ phosphorylation cascade promoting the transcriptional modulation of PhoP-regulated genes . 
High concentrations of extracellular Mg2 + ( mM range ) stimulate the phosphatase activity of the PhoQ somes in a unidirectional orientation , with the sensory domain facing the lumen and the catalytic domain facing the extraluminal environment . 
Reconstituted PhoQHis exhibited all the catalytic activities that have been described for histidine kinase sensors . 
Reconstituted PhoQHis was capable of autokinase activity when incubated in the presence of Mg2 + - ATP . 
The phosphoryl group could be transferred from reconstituted PhoQHis to PhoP . 
Reconstituted PhoQHis catalysed the dephosphorylation of phosphoPhoP and this activity was stimulated by the addition of extraluminal ADP . 
Key words : bacterial signal transduction , membrane receptor , phosphorylation , proteoliposome , Salmonella typhimurium , two-component system . 
sensor kinase , leading to dephosphorylation of the PhoP response regulator . 
Although much research has addressed the details of the catalytic mechanisms for autokinase and phosphatase activities , many questions remain about how environmental signals regulate these activities [ 10 -- 12 ] . 
In the case of the PhoQ kinase sensor , regulation of the catalytic activities occurs through Mg2 + binding to the extracellular PhoQ sensory domain [ 8 ] . 
Mg2 + recognition is believed to elicit a conformational change that controls the PhoQ enzymatic activities [ 8 ] . 
Recent studies , using the PhoQ protein overexpressed in membranes , have addressed whether one or both PhoQ catalytic activities are regulated by the Mg2 + - induced conformational change [ 10,11 ] . 
In the present study , we characterized the catalytic activities of the puriﬁed PhoQHis protein reconstituted into Escherichia coli phospholipids . 
We showed that reconstituted PhoQHis possesses autokinase activity and the ability to transfer the phosphoryl group to PhoP . 
In addition , we found that reconstituted PhoQ exhibits His phosphatase activity that is stimulated by the presence of ADP . 
EXPERIMENTAL Plasmid constructs
Epicurean coliTM strain XL-1 Blue cells ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA , U.S.A. ) were used for all DNA manipulations . 
The molecular cloning techniques used were as described by Sambrook et al. [ 13 ] or as recommended by the manufacturer . 
Plasmids pET-Q and pET-PHis encoding the full-length PhoQ and PhoPHis proteins respectively have been described previously [ 10 ] . 
For construction of plasmid pET-QHis , the phoQ gene of S. typhimurium was ampliﬁed by PCR from plasmid pET-Q using the forward primer QS-5 ′ - NDE ( 5 ′ - GGGCCGCCATATGAATAAATTTGCT-CGCCATTTTCTG-3 ′ ) , which contains an NdeI restriction site and the reverse primer QS-3 ′ - XHO ( 5 ′ - CGGCTCGAGTTCCTC-TTTCTGTGTGGGATGCTG-3 ′ ) , which contains an XhoI res-triction site . 
The PCR products were puriﬁed using the QIAquick PCR puriﬁcation kit ( Qiagen , Chatsworth , CA , U.S.A. ) , digested with NdeI and XhoI and inserted into the expression vector pET-20b ( + ) ( Novagen , Madison , WI , U.S.A. ) previously digested with the same restriction enzymes . 
To carry out in vivo analyses , we generated plasmid pPRO-Q by inserting the phoQ coding sequence into plasmid pPRO [ 14 ] . 
Plasmid pPRO-QHis was described previously [ 14 ] . 
In vivo analysis
The E. coli strain MG1607 contains a chromosomal mgtA : : lacZ transcriptional fusion and a disruption of the phoQ gene [ 15 ] . 
β-Galactosidase assays were conducted as described previously [ 14 ] . 
Brieﬂy , MG1607 cells were transformed with the pPRO , pPRO-Q or pPRO-QHis plasmids and grown overnight at 37 ◦ C in LB ( Luria -- Bertani ) broth supplemented with 0.2 % ( w/v ) glucose and 100 µg / ml ampicillin . 
Cultures were diluted 1:100 in the above medium , in the absence or presence of 10 mM MgCl2 , and grown to late-exponential phase before inducing with 1 mM IPTG ( isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside ) for 2 h. Cell lysates were prepared by using the Reporter lysis buffer ( Promega , Madison , WI , U.S.A. ) . 
β-Galactosidase activity was measured using ONPG ( o-nitrophenyl β-D-galactopyranoside ) as a substrate . 
One unit of β-galactosidase hydrolyses 1 µmol of ONPG/min at pH 7.5 and ◦ 37 C. 
Overexpression of PhoQHis and PhoP
The E. coli strain BL21 ( DE3 ) pLysE ( Novagen ) was used for protein expression . 
Cells were transformed with either the pET-20b ( + ) , pET-Q or pET-Q plasmids and grown at 37 ◦ C with His aeration in LB supplemented with 100 µg / ml ampicillin and 30 µg / ml chloramphenicol . 
Cells grown to late-logarithmic phase were induced with 0.5 mM IPTG for 4 h. Cells were harvested by centrifugation ( 5000 g , 10 min and 4 ◦ C ) and membrane vesicles were prepared as described previously [ 14 ] . 
Overexpression and puriﬁcation of the PhoP variant harbouring a C-terminal His tag was conducted as described previously [ 14 ] . 
Solubilization and puriﬁcation of PhoQHis
Membrane vesicles containing PhoQHis were diluted at a ﬁnal protein concentration of 2.5 mg/ml in a buffer consisting of 20 mM Tris/HCl ( pH 7.9 ) , 10 % ( v/v ) glycerol and detergent . 
Detergents used were 0.1 % ( v/v ) Triton X-100 , 0.1 and 1 % ( w/v ) DM ( dodecyl-β-D-maltoside ) , 0.1 and 1 % ( w/v ) DDM ( decyl-β-D-maltopyranoside ) or 0.1 % ( v/v ) LDAO ( lauryldimethylamine-N-oxide ) . 
Samples were gently vortex-mixed and incubated on ice for 1 h. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation ( 13 000 g , 30 min and 4 ◦ C ) and the supernatant was used for SDS / PAGE analysis and for in vitro global activity assays as described below . 
For puriﬁcation of the PhoQHis protein , PhoQHis-containing membranes were solubilized with 1 % DM as described above . 
Following centrifugation , the supernatant was loaded on to a 1 ml HiTrap chelating column ( Amersham Biosciences ) equilibrated in loading buffer ( 20 mM Tris/HCl , pH 7.9 , 500 mM NaCl , 50 mM imidazole and 0.1 % DM ) . 
The column was extensively washed with loading buffer and eluted by applying a 50 mM to 1 M imidazole gradient in loading buffer . 
Fractions containing PhoQHis were pooled and dialysed extensively against 20 mM Tris/HCl 
( pH 7.9 ) , 50 mM NaCl , 10 % glycerol and 0.1 % DM . 
The concentration of puriﬁed PhoQHis was measured using the BCA ( bicinchoninic acid ) protein assay ( Pierce , Rockford , IL , U.S.A. ) with dilutions of BSA as standards . 
Reconstitution of PhoQHis into liposomes
E. coli phospholipids ( E. coli polar lipid extract , acetone/ether washed ) were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids ( Alabaster , AL , U.S.A. ) . 
Liposomes for reconstitution were prepared as described by Racher et al. [ 16 ] using a buffer consisting of 50 mM Tris / HCl ( pH 8.0 ) , 10 mM 2-mercaptoethanol and stored at − 70 ◦ C until use . 
Triton X-100 , DDM , DM and LDAO at various concentrations were initially tested for their suitability to reconstitute PhoQHis . 
PhoQHis reconstitution was performed essentially as described for the E. coli ProP and PutP transporters [ 16,17 ] . 
Liposomes were thawed at room temperature ( 22 ◦ C ) , extruded 19 times through a 400 nm polycarbonate ﬁlter and diluted to 5 mg/ml with phosphorylation buffer ( 50 mM Tris/HCl , pH 7.5 , 200 mM KCl , 0.1 mM EDTA and 5 % glycerol ) . 
Liposomes were destabilized by the addition of 0.2 % DDM and the sample was incubated for 30 min at 22 ◦ C with agitation . 
The puriﬁed PhoQHis protein was added at the lipid/protein ratio of lipid/protein ( 80:1 , w/w ) , and the sample was incubated at 22 ◦ C with agitation for another 30 min . 
Detergents were removed by adding Bio-Beads SM-2 ( Bio-Rad Laboratories , Hercules , CA , U.S.A. ) at a wet weight bead/detergent ratio of 10:1 ( w/w ) . 
The sample was incubated at 22 ◦ C for 1 h with agitation , and a second ali-quot of Bio-Beads SM-2 was added . 
The sample was then incubated with agitation at 4 ◦ C overnight . 
The proteoliposome solution was removed from the Bio-Beads SM-2 and centrifuged at 470 000 g for 30 min at 4 ◦ C . 
The pellet was resuspended in phosphorylation buffer and used immediately . 
The concentration of PhoQHis in proteoliposomes was determined by SDS/PAGE using known concentrations of the puriﬁed protein . 
Urea extraction was performed as described previously [ 18 ] , by incubating proteoliposomes with 6.0 M urea at 4 ◦ C for 30 min . 
Following centrifugation ( 470 000 g , 30 min and 4 ◦ C ) , the supernatant and the resuspended pellet were analysed by SDS/PAGE . 
PhoQHis orientation in proteoliposomes
Orientation of PhoQHis was determined through the use of mem-brane-permeable and - impermeable thiol-reactive reagents . 
Fluorescent reagents were purchased from Molecular Probes ( Eugene , OR , U.S.A. ) . 
Proteoliposomes ( ∼ 1.5 µM PhoQHis ) were subjected to one of the following treatments with an incubation of 10 min at 22 ◦ C between reagent additions . 
For the determination of maximal labelling , proteoliposomes were solubilized with 1 % DM and subsequently labelled with 0.33 mM 5-IAF ( 5-iodoacetamide ﬂuorescein ) . 
To determine the percentage of PhoQHis molecules with the catalytic domain extraluminal , proteoliposomes were incubated with 0.33 mM 5-IAF to label externally exposed cysteine residues . 
To determine the percentage of PhoQHis molecules with the catalytic domain intraluminal , proteoliposomes were incubated with 0.33 mM AmdiS ( 4-acetamido - ′ 4 - maleidylstilbene-2 ,2 ′ - disulphonic acid ) to block externally exposed cysteine residues , solubilized with 1 % DM and then incubated with 0.33 mM 5-IAF to label solely the internally exposed cysteine residues . 
To control for unspeciﬁc labelling and ﬂuorescence , proteoliposomes were incubated with 10 mM NEM ( N-ethylmaleimide ) , a non-ﬂuorescent membrane-permeable thiol-reactive reagent , and then incubated with 0.33 mM 5-IAF . 
All reactions were stopped by the addition of 4 × Laemmli loading buffer ( 250 mM Tris/HCl , pH 6.8 , 8 % , w/v , SDS , 
40 % glycerol , 0.02 % Bromophenol Blue and 4 % , v/v , 2-mer-captoethanol ) and analysed by SDS/PAGE . 
Fluorescence of proteins labelled with 5-IAF was visualized using an FX Scanner ( Bio-Rad Laboratories ) using the internal 532 nm laser for excitation and the 555 nm Longpass ﬁlter for emission . 
Proteoliposome integrity
Proteoliposome integrity was assessed by determining the extent of leakage of β-galactosidase trapped within liposomes or proteo-liposomes . 
Proteoliposomes were prepared as described above and preloaded with 7.5 units of β-galactosidase . 
Following centri-fugation , proteoliposomes were resuspended in phosphoryl-ation buffer or phosphorylation buffer supplemented with 10 mM MgCl2 , CaCl2 or MnCl2 and incubated at 22 ◦ C for up to 150 min . 
Samples were then centrifuged at 470 000 g for 30 min at 4 ◦ C and the resulting supernatants and resuspended pellets were added to an equal volume of Reporter lysis buffer ( Promega ) . 
βGalactosidase activity was measured using ONPG as the substrate . 
In vitro global activity assays
The net phosphorylation of PhoP was measured by incubating intact PhoQ - or PhoQHis-containing membranes , solubilized PhoQHis-containing membranes or proteoliposomes ( all approx . 
1.5 µM of PhoQ or PhoQHis ) with an 8-fold molar excess of PhoP in a 15 µl volume of phosphorylation buffer supplemented with 5 mM MgCl2 . 
Reactions were initiated by the addition of 0.1 mM [ γ -32 P ] ATP ( 10 Ci/mmol ) , followed by incubation at 22 ◦ C for various time periods . 
Reactions were stopped by the × addition of 4 Laemmli loading buffer . 
Reaction products were heated at 37 ◦ C for 3 min and subjected to SDS/PAGE ( 10 % polyacrylamide ) . 
Gels were dried under vacuum and exposed to a phosphor screen . 
Phosphorylated proteins were visualized using an FX scanner and quantiﬁed by image analysis using the Quantity One software ( Bio-Rad Laboratories ) . 
All arbitrary units of intensity were converted into concentrations of 32P-phosphorylated protein based on a standard curve . 
In vitro autophosphorylation assays ∼
Proteoliposomes ( 1.5 µM PhoQHis ) were incubated with 0.1 mM [ γ -32 P ] ATP ( 10 Ci/mmol ) in a 15 µl volume of phosphorylation buffer supplemented with 5 mM MgCl2 . 
The phosphorylation reactions were continued at 22 ◦ C for various × time periods before being stopped by the addition of 4 Laemmli loading buffer . 
Phosphorylation products were analysed by SDS/PAGE as described above . 
In vitro phosphatase assays
Puriﬁed [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP was prepared as described previously [ 14 ] . 
Radiolabelled phospho-PhoP ( 12 µM ) was mixed with proteoliposomes ( ∼ 1.5 µM PhoQHis ) preloaded with 5 mM MgCl2 in 15 µl of phosphorylation buffer supplemented with 5 mM MgCl2 and various concentrations of ADP , GDP , p [ NH ] ppA ( adenosine 5 ′ - [ β , γ - imido ] triphosphate or AMP-PNP ) or GMP-PNP ( guanosine 5 ′ - [ β , γ - imido ] triphosphate ) where appropriate . 
Stability of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP in the presence of ADP or p [ NH ] ppA was assessed as described above except that proteo-liposomes were omitted from the reaction . 
After incubating at 22 ◦ C for various time periods , reactions were stopped by the addition of 4 × Laemmli loading buffer . 
Phosphorylated products were analysed by SDS/PAGE as described above . 
RESULTS Inﬂuence of the C-terminal His tag on PhoQ activity
To facilitate puriﬁcation of PhoQ , the phoQ gene was cloned into pET-20b ( + ) to yield the plasmid pET-QHis , which encodes the full-length PhoQ protein with six consecutive histidine residues at the C-terminus ( PhoQHis ) . 
We ﬁrst examined the effect of the C-terminal His tag on PhoQ activity in vivo by measuring the expression of mgtA ( a PhoP-activated gene that encodes an Mg2 + transporter ) through the β-galactosidase activity of an mgtA : : lacZ transcriptional fusion [ 15 ] . 
As shown in Figure 1 ( A ) , the resulting levels of β-galactosidase activity were essentially similar for cells producing PhoQ and PhoQHis in the absence of MgCl2 . 
In the presence of 10 mM MgCl2 , β-galactosidase activity was reduced by 10 - and 8-fold for cells producing PhoQ and PhoQHis respectively ( Figure 1A ) . 
Thus the C-terminal His tag does not grossly affect PhoQ activity and regulation by Mg2 + , in vivo . 
To further compare PhoQ and PhoQHis , we assessed the global activity of the PhoP/PhoQ system , in vitro , by measuring the net phosphorylation of PhoP resulting from both the autokinase and phosphatase activities of the PhoQ proteins . 
Both PhoQ and PhoQHis were expressed in E. coli membranes at similar levels and represented approx . 
10 % of the total membrane proteins 
( A ) Solubilization of PhoQHis . 
Membrane fractions containing the overexpressed PhoQHis protein were solubilized in 20 mM Tris/HCl ( pH 7.5 ) , 10 % glycerol and detergent . 
Lane 1 , non-solubilized membranes ; lane 2 , 0.1 % Triton X-100 ; lane 3 , 0.1 % LDAO ; lane 4 , 1 % DDM ; lane 5 , 0.1 % DDM ; lane 6 , 1 % DM ; lane 7 , 0.1 % DM . 
Following 1 h of incubation on ice , insoluble material was removed by centrifugation and the supernatants were analysed by SDS/PAGE . 
( B ) Net phosphorylation of PhoP by solubilized PhoQHis . 
In vitro global activity assays were conducted as indicated in the legend to Figure 1 . 
Lanes are as in ( A ) . 
( C ) SDS / PAGE analysis of PhoQHis puriﬁcation . 
The gel was stained with Coomassie Blue . 
Lane 1 , control membrane fractions from cells transformed with the empty plasmid ; lane 2 , membrane fractions from cells overexpressing PhoQHis ; lane 3 , puriﬁed PhoQHis ( ∼ 4 µg ) . 
Molecular mass standards are shown on the left . 
( results not shown ) . 
Membrane fractions containing either the PhoQ or PhoQHis proteins were incubated with an 8-fold molar excess of PhoP in the presence of [ γ -32 P ] ATP and 5 mM MgCl2 . 
Figure 1 ( B ) shows the amount of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP resulting from the activity of PhoQ or PhoQHis after a 20 min incubation period . 
Levels of radiolabelled phospho-PhoP were increased by 2-fold when incubated with PhoQHis compared with PhoQ . 
Analysis of the individual activities showed that the phosphatase activity of PhoQHis is slightly reduced compared with that of PhoQ , while the autokinase activities of both PhoQ proteins are similar ( results not shown ) . 
These in vitro results , consistent with the in vivo results shown in Figure 1 ( A ) , show that the activity of PhoQHis is not severely affected by the C-terminal His tag . 
Thus PhoQHis was used for further experimentation . 
Catalytic activity of the solubilized and puriﬁed PhoQHis To purify PhoQHis , optimal solubilization conditions were ﬁrst identiﬁed . 
The detergents Triton X-100 , LDAO , DM and DDM were used to solubilize membrane vesicles containing the overexpressed PhoQHis protein . 
All detergents tested were found to be 60 -- 80 % efﬁcient in solubilizing PhoQHis when compared with a non-solubilized control ( Figure 2A ) . 
When the series of solubilized PhoQHis was assayed for in vitro global activity by incubating for 20 min with an 8-fold molar excess of PhoP in the presence of [ γ -32 P ] ATP and 5 mM MgCl2 , PhoQHis solubilized in 0.1 % LDAO , DDM or DM retained more than 50 % activity as compared with a non-solubilized control ( Figure 2B ) . 
Although maximal activity was obtained with 0.1 % DDM ( Figure 2B , lane 5 ) , 0.1 % DM was deemed optimal for PhoQHis puriﬁcation . 
PhoQHis was puriﬁed by Ni-NTA ( Ni2 + - nitriloacetate ) chromatography ( Figure 2C ) and the identity of the puriﬁed protein was conﬁrmed by Western blotting using a monoclonal antibody directed against the His tag ( results not shown ) . 
No activity of puriﬁed PhoQHis was detected in the in vitro global activity assay regardless of the detergent used ( results not shown ) . 
Approximately 2.5 mg of puriﬁed PhoQHis was obtained from 50 mg of total membrane proteins . 
Functional reconstitution of PhoQHis in proteoliposomes Puriﬁed PhoQHis was reconstituted into detergent-destabilized liposomes prepared from E. coli phospholipids , based on the detergent-mediated method [ 19 ] . 
Puriﬁed PhoQHis in 0.1 % DM was added to liposomes destabilized with 0.2 % DDM and detergents were removed by adsorption to Bio-Beads SM-2 . 
The efﬁciency of PhoQHis reconstitution was assessed by comparing solubilized proteoliposomes with an amount of puriﬁed PhoQHis representing 100 % incorporation on SDS/PAGE . 
The efﬁciency was determined to be approx . 
86 % . 
Urea extraction was performed to show that the PhoQHis proteins are correctly inserted into liposomes . 
SDS/PAGE analysis of proteoliposomes treated with urea and subjected to centrifugation showed that approx . 
80 % of the PhoQHis proteins are resistant to urea treatment ( results not shown ) . 
Orientation of PhoQHis in proteoliposomes
PhoQ contains only two cysteine residues at positions 392 His and 395 in the cytoplasmic catalytic domain . 
By exploiting the location of these cysteine residues , we determined the orientation of PhoQHis in proteoliposomes through the differential use of thiol-reactive probes . 
A control reaction representing 100 % labelling was determined by solubilizing proteoliposomes with 1 % DM and labelling cysteine residues with 5-IAF ( Figure 3A , lane 1 ) . 
The percentage of PhoQHis molecules with the catalytic domain facing the extraluminal environment was determined by labelling externally exposed cysteine residues with the membrane-impermeable probe 5-IAF ( Figure 3A , lane 2 ) . 
These results suggest that nearly all PhoQHis proteins are orientated with the catalytic domain extraluminal . 
To conﬁrm this , the percentage of PhoQHis molecules with the catalytic domain facing the intraluminal environment was determined by labelling externally exposed cysteine residues with the membrane-impermeable thiolreactive probe AmdiS , solubilizing proteoliposomes with 1 % DM and subsequently labelling the remaining ( intraluminal ) exposed cysteine residues with 5-IAF ( Figure 3A , lane 3 ) . 
Very little ﬂuor-escence attributable to 5-IAF was detected , suggesting that very few PhoQHis proteins are orientated with the catalytic domain intraluminal . 
Proteoliposomes labelled with the membrane-permeable thiol-reactive probe NEM followed by 5-IAF showed little ﬂuorescence , indicating speciﬁc labelling of thiol groups ( Figure 3A , lane 4 ) . 
Following the ﬂuorescence experiments , SDS / polyacrylamide gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue to conﬁrm that similar amounts of protein were used in all reactions ( Figure 3B ) . 
Thus the orientation of PhoQHis in proteo-liposomes was found to be essentially unidirectional , with the catalytic domain extraluminal ( Figure 3C ) . 
To conﬁrm that the sensory domain of reconstituted PhoQHis is facing the lumen of proteoliposomes , we assessed the ability of PhoQHis to sense the intraluminal environment . 
Proteoliposomes were preloaded with the various bivalent cations known to be sensed by the PhoQ sensory domain [ 8 ] and in vitro global activity assays were performed . 
The presence of 5 mM intraluminal MgCl2 , CaCl2 or MnCl2 inhibited the phosphorylation of PhoP compared with proteoliposomes preloaded with no bivalent cations 
( A ) PhoQHis-proteoliposomes ( 1.5 µM PhoQHis ) were solubilized with 1 % DM and/or incubated with various thiol-reactive probes . 
Reactions were stopped by the addition of 4 × Laemmli loading buffer and analysed by SDS/PAGE . 
Fluorescence of PhoQHis labelled with 5-IAF was visualized as described in the Experimental section . 
Lane 1 , proteoliposomes were solubilized with 1 % DM and labelled with 5-IAF ; lane 2 , proteoliposomes were labelled with 5-IAF ; lane 3 , proteoliposomes were treated with AmdiS , solubilized with 1 % DM and labelled with 5-IAF ; lane 4 , proteoliposomes were treated with NEM and labelled with 5-IAF . 
( B ) SDS/PAGE analysis of the PhoQHis-proteoliposomes used in ( A ) . 
( C ) Schematic representation of the topology of PhoQHis in proteoliposomes . 
The catalytic domain of PhoQHis ( Cat ) is facing the extraluminal environment . 
The two cysteine residues , which are part of the catalytic domain , are indicated by ` C ' . 
( S. Sanowar and H. Le Moual , unpublished work ) . 
Altogether , these results provide strong evidence that PhoQHis in proteo-liposomes is able to sense the intraluminal environment through its sensory domain and signal to the extraluminal catalytic domain ( Figure 3C ) . 
Proteoliposome integrity
To assess proteoliposome leakage , liposomes or proteoliposomes were preloaded with β-galactosidase and incubated for up to 150 min in buffer or buffer supplemented with 10 mM MgCl , 2 CaCl2 or MnCl2 . 
The amount of β-galactosidase that leaked from the vesicles was measured using the substrate ONPG . 
There was no detectable leakage of β-galactosidase from liposomes or proteoliposomes exposed to these bivalent cations compared with a control exposed to buffer alone ( results not shown ) . 
The amount of β-galactosidase activity released upon solubilization of the vesicles was similar for all samples . 
Although β-galactosidase is much larger than ionic solutes , these data indicate that MgCl , 2 CaCl2 or MnCl2 at a concentration of up to 10 mM do not grossly disrupt the membrane permeability barrier . 
In vitro autokinase activity of reconstituted PhoQHis
In the in vitro autokinase assay , we measured the amount of phospho-PhoQHis generated at various time points . 
To maximize the PhoQHis autokinase activity , proteoliposomes were preloaded with phosphorylation buffer devoid of MgCl2 and incubated in the presence of extraluminal [ γ -32 P ] ATP and 5 mM MgCl2 . 
Over time , we observed a slow and sustained net accumulation of 
PhoQHis-proteoliposomes ( 1.5 µM PhoQHis ) preloaded with phosphorylation buffer devoid of MgCl2 wereincubatedat22 ◦ Cinphosphorylationbuffersupplementedwith0 .1 mM [ γ -32 P ] ATP and 5 mM MgCl2 . 
At the indicated time points , reactions were stopped by the addition of 4 × Laemmli loading buffer and analysed by SDS/PAGE . 
The amounts of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoQHis were determined with a phosphoimager . 
PhoQ - proteoliposomes ( 1.5 µM PhoQ ) preloaded with phosphorylation buffer devoid of His His MgCl2 were incubated at 22 ◦ C with an 8-fold molar excess of PhoP in phosphorylation buffer supplemented with 0.1 mM [ γ -32 P ] ATP and 5 mM MgCl2 . 
At speciﬁc time points , reactions were stopped by the addition of 4 × Laemmli loading buffer and analysed by SDS/PAGE . 
The amounts of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP were determined with a phosphoimager . 
[ P ] phospho-PhoQHis that reached an apparent steady-state level after 120 min ( Figure 4 ) . 
These results demonstrate that reconstituted PhoQHis is capable of autokinase activity . 
In vitro global activity of reconstituted PhoQHis
To examine the kinetics of net phosphorylation of PhoP by reconstituted PhoQHis , proteoliposomes preloaded with phosphoryl-ation buffer devoid of MgCl2 were incubated with an 8-fold excess of PhoP in the presence of [ γ -32 P ] ATP and 5 mM MgCl2 . 
Over time , we observed a slow and sustained net accumulation of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP that reached an apparent steady state after a 120 min incubation ( Figure 5 ) . 
Thus the phosphoryl group can be transferred from reconstituted PhoQHis to PhoP . 
As expected from the molar excess of PhoP used in the assay , higher levels of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP were obtained compared with levels of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoQHis ( Figures 4 and 5 ) . 
In vitro phosphatase activity of reconstituted PhoQHis is stimulated by nucleotides To assess the phosphatase activity of reconstituted PhoQHis , we incubated puriﬁed [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP with proteoliposomes 
( A ) Time course of reconstituted PhoQHis phosphatase activity . 
PhoQHis-proteoliposomes were preloaded with phosphorylation buffer supplemented with 5 mM MgCl2 . 
In vitro phosphatase assays were performed as described in the Experimental section with phosphorylation buffer supplemented with 5 mM MgCl2 and nucleotides when indicated . 
Reaction products were analysed by SDS/PAGE . 
The amounts of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP remaining were determined with a phosphoimager . 
Intrinsic dephosphorylation of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP ( ) , dephosphorylation of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP by reconstituted PhoQHis in the absence ( ) or in the presence of 1 mM extraluminal ADP ( ) . 
( B ) Effect of extraluminal nucleotides on the dephosphorylation of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP . 
In vitro phosphatase assays were performed for 20 min as described in ( A ) with phosphorylation buffer supplemented with 5 mM MgCl2 and GDP , GMP-PNP , ADP or p [ NH ] ppA at the indicated concentrations . 
( C ) Effect of ADP and p [ NH ] ppA on the stability of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP . 
Intrinsic dephosphorylation of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP in the presence of phosphorylation buffer ( ) , phosphorylation buffer supplemented with 1 mM ADP ( ) or phosphorylation buffer supplemented with 1 mM p [ NH ] ppA ( ) . 
preloaded with phosphorylation buffer supplemented with 5 mM MgCl2 . 
Aliquots were removed at different time points and the time course of the reaction was followed . 
A control reaction in which [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP was incubated with liposomes lacking PhoQHis indicated the intrinsic stability of [ 32P ] phosphoPhoP . 
As shown in Figure 6 ( A ) , reconstituted PhoQHis dephosphorylated only 20 % of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP after 60 min . 
Thus , under these experimental conditions , reconstituted PhoQHis had little phosphatase activity . 
ADP and the non-hydrolysable ATP analogue , p [ NH ] ppA have been shown to stimulate the phosphatase activity of the EnvZ and NRII ( nitrogen regulator II ) histidine kinase sensors [ 20 -- 22 ] . 
To assess the effect of nucleo-tides on the phosphatase activity of reconstituted PhoQHis , we conducted phosphatase assays in the presence of various concentrations of extraluminal ADP , p [ NH ] ppA GDP or GMP-PNP . 
As shown in Figure 6 ( B ) , levels of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP decreased when assays were performed in the presence of either ADP or p [ NH ] ppA . 
In contrast , the presence of GDP or GMP-PNP had no effect on the levels of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP ( Figure 6B ) . 
To assess whether ADP and p [ NH ] ppA act on reconstituted PhoQHis or dir-ectly on phospho-PhoP , we tested the stability of [ 32P ] phosphoPhoP in the presence of 1 mM of these nucleotides . 
As shown in Figure 6 ( C ) , p [ NH ] ppA stimulated the dephosphorylation of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP in a PhoQHis-independent manner . 
In contrast , ADP had no major effect on the stability of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP ( Figure 6C ) , suggesting that it promotes the dephosphorylation of phospho-PhoP by stimulating the phosphatase activity of reconstituted PhoQHis . 
As shown in Figure 6 ( A ) , ADP at a concentration of 1 mM increased [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP dephosphorylation to 70 % after 45 min . 
These results suggest that ADP affects the conformation of the PhoQHis cytoplasmic domain . 
DISCUSSION
The PhoP/PhoQ two-component system of S. typhimurium controls the expression of many genes , including virulence factors , in response to depletion of environmental Mg2 + [ 8,23,24 ] . 
To date , the catalytic activities of the PhoQ kinase sensor have been characterized , in vitro , using membrane preparations in which PhoQ is overproduced [ 10,11,14 ] . 
In the present study , we developed a puriﬁed and reconstituted system to study transmembrane signalling by PhoQ . 
PhoQHis was puriﬁed and reconstituted into E. coli phospholipids . 
Under our experimental conditions , insertion of PhoQHis into phospholipid vesicles was unidirectional with the sensory domain facing the lumen . 
We found that reconstituted PhoQHis is functional and catalyses auto-phosphorylation , the transfer of the phosphoryl group to PhoP and the dephosphorylation of phospho-PhoP . 
To facilitate puriﬁcation , we used a PhoQ variant with a Cterminal His tag ( PhoQHis ) . 
The possibility that the tag severely affects the PhoQ catalytic activities is most unlikely , since both the tagged and non-tagged proteins show essentially similar activity 2 + in vivo and in vitro ( Figure 1 ) as well as Mg regulation , in vivo ( Figure 1A ) . 
To date , the few kinase sensors that have been studied in a reconstituted system are KdpD , EnvZ and DcuS of E. coli [ 25 -- 27 ] . 
In contrast with the solubilized KdpD and DcuS sensor kinases [ 25,27 ] , PhoQHis retained the ability to autophosphorylate and transfer its phosphoryl group to PhoPHis upon solubilization ( Figure 2B ) . 
Results similar to those for PhoQHis were obtained with solubilized EnvZ [ 26 ] . 
These differences may be due to the detergent used in the solubilization procedures . 
Following puriﬁcation using Ni-NTA afﬁnity chromatography , PhoQHis was inactive ( results not shown ) , the reason for which is not clear . 
It is possible that puriﬁed PhoQHis lost its dimeric structure that is crucial for trans-autophosphorylation , which occurs between two PhoQ monomers [ 28,29 ] . 
Another possibility is that PhoQHis necessitates lipid components for activity , which would be retained upon solubilization but washed away during puriﬁcation . 
Importantly , PhoQHis regained its ability to autophosphorylate and transfer its phosphoryl group to PhoP , once reconstituted into proteoliposomes ( Figures 4 and 5 ) . 
These results suggest that a lipid environment is necessary to provide the appropriate structural arrangement required for PhoQHis activity . 
Although reconstituted PhoQHis exhibited all the catalytic activities that are the hallmark of histidine kinase sensors , it showed signiﬁcant differences compared with PhoQ or PhoQ overHis produced in bacterial membranes [ 10,11,14 ] . 
Reconstituted PhoQHis autophosphorylates slowly and the phospholinkage appears to be stable for at least 150 min ( Figure 4 ) . 
In contrast , the kinetics of autophosphorylation of PhoQ overproduced in E. coli membranes was strongly biphasic , with a rapid phosphorylation phase followed by a slower dephosphorylation phase [ 10 ] . 
This difference in the stability of phospho-PhoQ between the two systems can be explained in two ways . 
First , interaction of MgCl2 ( 5 mM ) with the periplasmic sensory domain of PhoQ in E. coli membranes may impose on PhoQ a conformation that promotes its dephosphorylation . 
The absence of MgCl2 from the lumen of proteoliposomes would prevent reconstituted PhoQHis from adopting such a conformation , leading to phospholinkage stability . 
Secondly , dephosphorylation of overproduced PhoQ 2 + may be due to a Mg - dependent phosphatase present in E. coli membranes but absent from the puriﬁed and reconstituted system . 
In cells , response regulator molecules appear to exist in excess over kinase sensor molecules [ 30 ] . 
By using an 8-fold molar excess of PhoP with respect to PhoQHis in proteoliposomes , a 2-fold ampliﬁcation of the signal was observed as shown by the difference between the levels of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoQHis and [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP obtained at 150 min ( Figures 4 and 5 ) . 
Ampliﬁcation of the signal to a higher extent may be limited by the intrinsic autophosphatase activity of PhoP observed in vitro [ 11 ] . 
Indeed , we found that the half-life of [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP is approx . 
80 min in the presence of 5 mM MgCl2 ( Figure 6A ) . 
Kinetics obtained for PhoP phosphorylation ( Figure 5 ) and PhoQ autophosphorylation ( Figure 4 ) are consistent with the fact that transfer of the phosphoryl group to the response regulator is fast compared with the autophosphorylation of kinase sensors , which constitutes the rate-limiting step of the phosphorylation cascade [ 3 ] . 
We found that reconstituted PhoQHis has little phosphatase activity in the absence of ADP ( Figure 6A ) . 
In contrast , PhoQ or PhoQ overproduced in E. coli membranes were able to deHis phosphorylate [ 32P ] phospho-PhoP completely without additional ADP , keeping all other experimental conditions similar [ 10,14 ] . 
This highlights another major difference between the reconstituted system and membrane preparations in which PhoQ is overexpressed . 
One possibility is that PhoQHis in proteoliposomes can not adopt a phosphatase-dominant conformation in the absence of ADP , even though MgCl2 is present at a concentration of 5 mM in the lumen of proteoliposomes . 
We found that ADP and p [ NH ] ppA , but not GDP and GMP-PNP , increased the dephosphorylation of phospho-PhoP possibly by stimulating the phosphatase activity of reconstituted PhoQ ( Figure 6B ) . 
His Strikingly , we found that p [ NH ] ppA directly affects the stability of phospho-PhoP ( Figure 6C ) , the mechanism behind this being still unclear . 
In contrast , ADP did not affect phospho-PhoP stability ( Figure 6C ) . 
Thus we conclude that ADP stimulates the phosphatase activity of reconstituted PhoQHis by interacting with the catalytic domain . 
It has been proposed that signals transduced across the membrane alter the spatial arrangement between the ATP-binding domain and the central dimerization domain of sensor kinases [ 6,31 ] . 
Our data suggest that in the absence of ADP , these domains can not adopt proper positioning for maximal phosphatase activity . 
Binding of ADP to the ATP-binding domain of reconstituted PhoQHis appears to provide a conformation capable of enhanced phosphatase activity ( Figure 6A ) . 
Altogether , these results indicate that reconstituted PhoQHis is not locked in a kinase-dominant conformation and can switch to a phosphatasedominant conformation in the presence of ADP . 
This in vitro reconstituted PhoP/PhoQ system will allow us to vary systematically the concentration of intraluminal bivalent cations acting as ligands ( Mg2 + , Ca2 + and Mn2 + ) , while maintaining a constant concentration of extraluminal catalytic Mg2 + . 
Future studies will clarify whether both the autokinase and phosphatase activities of PhoQ are targets for regulation by bivalent cations , as suggested previously for Mg2 + [ 10 ] . 
In addition , this system will aid in elucidating the molecular mechanism of signal transduction across the cell membrane . 
This work was supported by grant MOP-15551 from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research ( CIHR ) . 
H.L.M. was supported by a fellowship from Fonds de la Recherche en Santé du Québec ( FRSQ ) . 
S.S. was the recipient of a Faculty of Medicine Internal Studentship Award ( McGill University ) and a graduate studentship from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada ( NSERC ) . 
We thank Dr R. Utsumi ( Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology , Graduate School of Agriculture , Kinki University , Nakamachi , Japan ) for providing the E. coli strain MG1607 and Dr G. Marczynski ( Department of Microbiology and Immunology , McGill University ) for a critical reading of this paper .