Vaccine 23 ( 2005 ) 4521 -- 4531 
Investigation of ansB and sspA derived promoters for single-copy antigen expression in attenuated Salmonella enterica var. typhimurium
multi - and 
Tamsin D. Terry , John E. Downes , Stefanie J. Dowideit , Amanda N. Mabbett , Michael P. Jennings ∗ 
School of Molecular and Microbial Sciences , The University of Queensland , St. Lucia , Brisbane , Qld . 
4072 , Australia 
Received 20 May 2004 ; received in revised form 20 September 2004 ; accepted 5 April 2005 Available online 17 May 2005 
Abstract 
Five candidate promoters were examined to determine their utility in directing immunogenic levels of expression of the C fragment from tetanus toxin in attenuated S. enterica used as an oral vaccine in mice . 
Promoters derived from the genes encoding the stringent starvation protein ( sspA ) from E. coli and S. enterica , but not ansB derived promoters , expressed immunogenic levels of C fragment from multi-copy plasmids in attenuated S. enterica in vivo and , following oral immunization , induced high titre speciﬁc anti-tetanus toxoid serum antibodies . 
We also demonstrate that not only the choice of promoter , replicon and growth conditions but also how expression constructs are assembled in the chosen plasmid is critical for the successful development of plasmid-based antigen delivery systems using attenuated S. enterica . 
In addition , the S. enterica sspA promoter is able to elicit anti-tetanus toxoid antibodies in mice when the psspA-tetC expression cassette is integrated in single copy on the S. enterica chromosome . 
© 2005 Elsevier Ltd. . 
All rights reserved . 
Keywords: Live attenuated Salmonella typhimurium; Oral vaccine delivery; Starvation induced promoters
1. Introduction
sively studied as potential vectors for the oral delivery of heterologous antigens . 
Salmonella strains have been modiﬁed to express antigens derived from other bacterial [ 1 ] , viral , parasitic [ 2 ] and fungal pathogens . 
When used as a vaccine , systemic and cellular immune responses against both Salmonella and the heterologous antigen develop , providing protection against infection by Salmonella and the heterologous pathogen . 
Salmonella rely on the use of multi-copy plasmids to carry the antigen gene . 
Although plasmid-encoded heterologous antigens are expressed at high levels , the use of tightly-regulated Live attenuated Salmonella vaccines have been extenMost methods for expressing heterologous antigens in promoters is required to prevent the loss of the plasmid in vivo [ 3,4 ] . 
Promoters that have been successfully used to deliver experimental heterologous antigens encoded on a plasmid include pagC [ 3 ] , a nirB derivative [ 4 ] and htrA [ 5 ] . 
However , there are a number of problems that may arise from the use of plasmids to deliver heterologous antigens . 
The metabolic burden induced by the plasmid can reduce the growth rate of plasmid-containing bacteria , resulting in overattenuation in vivo thus weakening the immune response and selecting for those bacteria that have lost the plasmid [ 6,3,7 ] . 
Although the plasmids used in Salmonella delivery systems do not contain genes encoding DNA transfer systems , there is still a theoretical risk that the plasmid may transfer from the attenuated Salmonella strain into other commensals or environmental bacteria [ 8 ] . 
Most plasmid-based Salmonella delivery systems have been tested using plasmids harbouring antibiotic resistance genes . 
These genes will need to be removed before commercial vaccines for human or veterinary use are developed , however some method for selection for the plasmid-containing strain during manufacture will still be required . 
Chromosomal integration of the heterologous antigen expression system avoids these problems and has been shown to provide protection from challenge in some experimental systems [ 9,10 ] . 
However , in general the immune responses to chromosomal antigens are weaker than those from antigens encoded in multi-copy plasmids , and there is a need for a highly efﬁcient chromosomal expression system for heterologous antigens . 
In this study , we describe the analysis of ﬁve strong , starvation or anaerobiosis induced promoters to determine their suitability for efﬁcient delivery of heterologous antigens encoded both on plasmids and as a chromosomal insertion . 
∗ Corresponding author . 
Tel. : +61 7 3365 4879 ; fax : +61 7 3365 4620 . 
E-mail address : jennings@uq.edu.au ( M.P. Jennings ) . 
0264-410X / $ -- see front matter © 2005 Elsevier Ltd. . 
All rights reserved . 
doi :10.1016 / j.vaccine .2005.04.02 
2. Methods
2.1. Growth media and supplements
Escherichia coli and S. enterica strains were cultivated in Luria-Bertani medium ( LB ) supplemented with appropriate antibiotics and aromix [ 11 ] . 
2.2. Construction of plasmid-based tetC expression cassettes in S. enterica
trol of various promoters , plasmid p MJF1 was constructed . 
First , an unrelated gene cloned into pQE-30 ( Qiagen ) that had sites for the restriction enzymes EcoRI , NotI , PstI and HindIII ( junction with pQE30 vector ) just after the 3 ′ end of the gene was ampliﬁed by PCR using primers ST15 ( includes EagI site ) and pQE-Pro . 
A fragment containing the λt0 terminator was excised by digestion with EcoRI and EagI , gel-puriﬁed and ligated to pBR322 that had previously been digested with EcoRI and EagI resulting in plasmid A . 
The E. coli ansB promoter was excised from pMJF1 [ 15 ] by digestion with HindIII , treated with T4 DNA polymerase to remove overhangs , and further digested with EcoRI . 
The resulting fragment was ligated to plasmid A that had been digested with NotI , and the site converted to a blunt end by T4 polymerase and then the DNA digested with EcoRI , resulting in plasmid p MJF1 . 
The C terminal fragment ( TetC ) of the tetanus toxin from Clostridium tetanii was ampliﬁed from plasmid pKK/ppagC/C frag [ 3 ] using primers ST24 ( includes a BamHI site ) and ST25 ( binds downstream of a HindIII site in plasmid pKK/ppagC/C frag ) . 
The PCR fragment was digested with BamHI and HindIII and ligated to BamHI/HindIII digested pQE-32 plasmid DNA ( Qiagen ) . 
Expression of TetC from the resulting plasmid , pQE32-TetC was conﬁrmed by transferring the plasmid to the E. coli expression strain M15/pREP4 and analysing cell extracts from induced cultures by western blotting using monoclonal anti-Tetanus toxin C fragment antibody ( Roche ) . 
The tetC To facilitate cloning of various antigens under the congene from plasmid pQE32-TetC was excised using the restriction enzymes BamHI and HindIII , and ligated to p MJF1 also digested with BamHI and HindIII , resulting in plasmid pBRansBETetC - . 
Plasmids containing the S. enterica ansB ( primers ST01 and ST02 , pBRansBTetC - ) and E. coli sspA ( primers ST35 and ST36 , pBRsspAETetC - ) and S. enterica sspA ( primers ST37 and ST36 , pBRsspATetC - ) promoters were derived from pBRansBTetC - by removing the E. coli ansB promoter by digestion with EcoRI and BamHI and ligating in EcoRI/BamHI digested PCR products containing the new promoter . 
A series of plasmids based on pKK/ppagC/C frag with different promoters was also created . 
The sspA promoters were ampliﬁed from E. coli ( primers ST35 and ST36 ) and S. enterica ( primers ST36 and ST37 ) , and digested with EcoRI , blunt-ended using T4 DNA polymerase , followed by digestion with NcoI . 
These promoters were ligated to pKK/ppagC/C frag that had been digested with BamHI , blunt-ended using T4 DNA polymerase and digested with NcoI , creating plasmids pKKsspATetC ( S. enterica ) and pKKsspAETetC ( E. coli ) . 
Plasmid pKKsspATetC was digested with SacI and NcoI and ligated to a digested PCR product containing the cf > FNR promoter region ampliﬁed from pMJF1cf > FNR [ 15 ] using primers ST38 and ST39 , creating plasmid pKKcf > FNRTetC . 
All plasmids were transferred by electroporation into strain JA08 , a laboratory generated rifampicin derivative of STM1 [ 7 ] , that had been re-isolated from a mouse spleen 7 days after infection to ensure that the rifampicin mutation did not affect colonization . 
2.3. Construction of chromosomally inserted tetC expression cassettes
ment using primers ST06 and ST07 from the 5 ′ end of the S. enterica aroD gene ( GenBank accession number AF184963 ) by PCR followed by ligation of XbaI and SphI digested PCR product and plasmid pCVD442 [ 12 ] and transformation into DH5 λpir . 
Plasmid pCVDaroD was digested with SacI and SmaI and ligated to a SacI/EcoRV digested PCR product generated by amplifying 500 bp from the 3 ′ end of the S. enterica strain STM1 aroD gene using primers ST10 and ST11 ( Table 1 ) resulting in plasmid pCVDaroDins that includes two sections of the aroD gene separated by SacI , NotI and SphI restriction sites . 
Antigens and promoters were cloned into these sites either by restriction digestion of puriﬁed plasmids or of PCR products synthesised with appropriately designed primers . 
PfuTurbo ® DNA polymerase ( Stratagene ) with a promoter speciﬁc 5 ′ primer ( Table 1 ) and primer ST43 for pKK-based plasmids or primer ST15 for pBR-based plasmids . 
PCR products were digested with SacI and SphI and ligated to pCVDaroDins , which had been digested similarly . 
These plasmids ( Table 2 ) were used to transform the E. coli conjugative dono Plasmid pCVDaroD was constructed by amplifying a frag-The promoter-tetC gene cassettes were ampliﬁed using strain S17 .1 pir by electroporation . 
Cultures of S17 .1 pir cells harbouring the plasmids were cross-streaked onto an LB agar plate supplemented with aromix with strain JA08 . 
Plates were incubated at 37 ◦ C for 8 h before the cultures were harvested into LB broth and serial dilutions of each conjugation plated on LB agar plates containing ampicillin ( 50 g/ml ) , rifampicin ( 50 g/ml ) and aromix , then grown overnight at 
37 ◦ C. Transconjugants were screened for expression of TetC and the presence of the promoter-tetC construct in the aroD gene on the STM1/Rif chromosome was conﬁrmed by PCR ( Fig. 1A ) . 
Plasmid pCVDaroDins included a counter-selectable marker , the sacB gene , which is toxic when the bacteria are grown in the presence of sucrose , and can be used to select for the loss of the plasmid backbone and associated ampicillin resistance ( a double-crossover ) by recombination of the plasmid and chromosomal aroD sequences . 
However , with all six promoters tested , all sucrose resistant and ampicillin sensitive colonies isolated had reverted to the wild-type aroD gene and it was not possible to isolate colonies containing the promoter-tetC cassette inserted in the aroD gene in the absence of the pCVDaroDins plasmid backbone . 
An alternative approach , using blue/white screening was used to create a S. enterica strain with only the sspA-tetC cassette derived from pKKsspATetC with no remnants of the pCVD442 vector backbone in the aroD gene . 
First , the lacZ gene from E. coli encoding the enzyme - galactosidase was cloned into plasmid pKKsspATetC , replacing the tetC gene and creating plasmid pKKsspAlacZ . 
The sspA-lacZ cassette was transferred to plasmid pCVDaroDins , conjugated into JA08 and sucrose resistant colonies were isolated as described above . 
Sucrose resistant colonies were plated on media containing 40 g/ml 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl - - d-galactopyranoside ( X-Gal ) . 
A sucrose resistant colony that was blue in colour having retained the sspA-lacZ cassette but lost the plasmid backbone was named QD03 ( Table 3 ) . 
Plasmid pCVDaroDsspATetC was introduced into strain QD03 by conjugation , resulting in recombination in the aroD-sspA-lacZ allele . 
After selection on LB ( no NaCl ) 20 % sucrose plates containing 40 g/ml X-Gal , some white colonies amongst thousands of blue colonies were observed . 
Representative colonies were characterised by PCR and the entire aroD locus sequenced conﬁrming that the strain ( JD09 ) contained the sspA-tetC cassette in the aroD gene but had lost the pCVDaroDins vector backbone and the lacZ gene ( Fig. 1B ) . 
Expression of TetC was conﬁrmed using dot blots with mouse monoclonal anti-tetanus toxin C fragment antibody ( Roche ) . 
The integrity of the bacterial LPS was anal ¬ 
Table 1 
Oligonucleotide primers used to construct expression cassettes Name Oligonucleotide sequence ( 5 ′ -- 3 ′ ) 
Binding site 
Enzymes EcoRI 
5 ′ pansB S. enterica 3 ′ pansB S. enterica 5 ′ aroD S. enterica 5 ′ aroD S. enterica 3 ′ aroD S. enterica 3 ′ aroD S. enterica 5 ′ pansB E. coli 3 ′ to 5 ′ tetC 3 ′ tetC 5 ′ psspA E. coli 3 ′ psspAa 5 ′ psspA S. enterica 5 ′ cf > FNR 3 ′ cf > FNR 3 ′ of rrnBto 3 ′ rrnBto 3 ′ rrnBto bla 3 ′ tetC PQE32 
ST01 GCGAATTCTGTTTTTTCCTGCAT ST02 CGGATCCCCATGTTATATCTCCAG 
BamHI XbaI SphI SacI , NotI EcoRV EcoRI , SacI EagI/SphI/SmaI BamHI 
ST06 GACATCTAGAGGTACCAAATGAAAACCGT ST07 ATATCGCATGCCAGTTCCTGCATTTTC ST10 ATGGAGCTCGCGGCCGGTGATATTCCGAAG ST11 GGCGATATCTGGAATATAATTTACTG ST12 GTGGAATTCGAGCTCGGTCGGGAATTTAAAATAAT ST15 CATCGGCCGCATGCCCGGGCCTGAAAATCTCGCCAAGC ST24 GCGGATCCAAAATCTGGATTGTTGGG ST25 CGGCGTTTCACTTCTGAG ST35 ATCGGAATTCGAGCTCTAAGTCAACTATTTCAGACT ST36 GCAGGGATCCCCATGGAAACCTCCAGGTAT ST37 GACAGAATTCGAGCTCGGGCGAGCATTTCAGACC ST38 GCACGAGCTCGCCGTTTAATTCTTCGTTTTTTGACCTGCCTCAAAC ST39 CTGTCCATGGCATTCCTCCAGTTACGTG ST43 GCAGGCATGCGTCTCATGAGCGGATACA ST52 GCAGGCATGCAAAGAGTTTGTAGAAACGCA ST53 GCATGCGGCCGATGTGCGTTTCTACAAACTCTTTTG ST55 ATTAATTGTTGCCGGGAAGCTAGA ST56 GATAGAATTCTAAGAGTAGG pQE-Pro CCCGAAAAGTGCCACCTG a Binds both E. coli and S. enterica 3 ′ sspA promoters . 
EcoRI/SacI BamHI/NcoI EcoRI/SacI SacI NcoI SphI SphI SphI , EagI 
Table 2 
Plasmids used in this study Plasmid 
Relevant characteristics 
Reference [ 3 ] [ 30 ] [ 12 ] [ 15 ] [ 15 ] 
pKK/ppagC/C frag ppagC-tetC cassette inserted into pKK233-2 pBR322 GenBank accession no . 
J01749 
pCVD442 Conjugatable , pir dependent replicon pMJF1 Plasmid containing E. coli ansB promoter and lacZ pMJF1cf > FNR Containing a mutant E. coli ansB promoter and lacZ pCVDaroD pCVD442 with 5 ′ section of S. enterica aroD Plasmid A pBR322 with to from pQE-30 inserted between EcoRI and EagI sites p MJF1 Derivative of plasmid A with ansBE upstream of to pQE-32-TetC pQE-32 expressing the C terminal fragment of tetanus toxoid ( TetC ) pBRansBETetC - Derivative of p MJF1 with tetC gene between promoter and terminator pBRansBTetC - pBRansBETetC - with the ansBS promoter replacing ansBE pBRsspATetC - pBRansBETetC - with the sspAS promoter replacing ansBEt pBRsspAETetC - pBRansBETetC - with the sspAE promoter replacing ansBE pKKsspATetC pKK/ppagC/C frag with sspAS promoter replacing pagC pKKsspAETetC pKK/ppagC/C frag with sspAE promoter replacing pagC pKKcf > FNRTetC pKK/ppagC/C frag with cf > FNR promoter replacing pagC pCVDaroDins pCVD442 with 5 ′ and 3 ′ sections of S. enterica aroD separated by p rrnBto p to pKK p lacking p lacing p etween p deleted ( nsB an v da phag CVDaroDsspATetC pCVDaroDins with psspAS-tetC - cassette KKsspAlacZ lacZ gene from pMJF1 cloned in sspATetC BRsspATetC - 1 pBRsspATetC - with tetC gene , extra BamHI site from pKK/ppagC/C frag BRsspATetC-R1 pBRsspATetC - 1 with rrnBto rep to KKsspATetC - R pKKsspATetC with to inserted b 3 ' end of tetC and the rrnBto KKsspATetC - pKKsspATet - R with the rrnBto E ) Promoter derived from E. coli ; ( S ) Promoter derived from S. enterica ( a d sspA in plasmid names refer to the S. enterica promoter , ersions of these promoters are signiﬁed by ( E ) ; ( to ) terminator from lamb e ; ( rrnBto ) E. coli ribosomal RNA terminator 
whereas E. coli 
Table 3 Strains used in this study 
Strain Relevant characteristics reference
DH5 pir E. coli lysogen of DH5 containing pir gene required for pCVD442 replication S17 .1 pir E. coli conjugative donor strain [ 31 ] GM2163 E. coli dam dcm strain STM1 aroA mutation of S. enterica serovar typhimurium [ 7 ] JA08 Rifampicin resistant mutant of STM1 QD03 JA08 with psspAS-lacZ in aroD gene JD08 QD03 + pKK/ppagC/C frag JD09 JA08 with psspAS-tetC in aroD gene ( rrnBto terminator ) JD04 JA08 + pKKcf > FNRTetC ( rrnBto terminator ) ) JD06 JA08 + pKKsspATetC ( S. enterica sspA promoter , rrnBto terminator ) PC01 JA08 + pKKsspAETetC ( E. coli sspA promoter , rrnBto terminator ) QB06 JA08 + pBRsspATetC - ( S. enterica sspA promoter ) JE02 JA08 + pBRsspATetC - 1 ( S. enterica sspA promoter no BamHI site ) JE07 JA08 + pBRsspATetC-R1 PC02 JA08 + pKKsspATetC - ( S. enterica sspA promoter , to terminator ) PC03 JA08 + pKKsspATetC - R ( S. enterica sspA promoter , JB07 JA08 + pKK/ppagC/C frag ( E ) Promoter derived from E. coli ; ( ) terminator from lambda phage ; ( R ) rrnBto E. coli ribosomal RNA terminator to and rrnBto terminator ) ysed prior to selection of strains used in immunizations [ 13 ] . 
Table 3 Strains used in this study 
2.4. Construction of isogenic pBR322 and pKK233-2 based plasmids with differing terminators
The tetC gene in the original pBRsspATetC - includes an extra BamHI site , immediately downstream from the start codon of the gene that is not found in pKKsspATetC . 
The tetC gene from pKKsspATetC was excised by digestion with NcoI and HindIII and subcloned into NcoI and HindIII digested pBRsspATetC - creating plasmid pBRsspATetC-1 . 
The tetC - to cassette from this plasmid was excised by digestion with EagI followed by blunt ending with T4 DNA polymerase , digested with NcoI and ligated to plasmid pKKsspATetC digested with HindIII followed by blunt ending with T4 DNA polymerase and digestion with NcoI . 
In the resulting plasmid , pKKsspATetC - R , a to terminator sequence has been inserted between the tetC gene and rrnBto terminator sequences . 
To create a version of this plasmid without the rrnBto terminator sequence , a section of the pKK233-2 backbone immediately downstream of the rrnBto was ampliﬁed by PCR using primers ST53 and ST55 . 
The PCR product was cloned into pGEM-T Easy , and the resulting plasmid and pKKsspATetC - R were transferred to the dam dcm E. coli strain GM2163 . 
Unmethylated plasmid pKKsspATetC - R DNA was digested with SmaI and PvuI and the PCR product excised from pGEM-T Easy by digestion with SphI , blunt ended with T4 DNA polymerase and further digested by PvuI . 
The use of unmethylated DNA enhances the ligation of fragments digested with PvuI . 
Ligation of the digested pKKsspATetC - R1 vector backbone and PCR fragment resulted in plasmid pKKsspATetC - . 
To create plasmid pBRsspATetC-R1 , the rrnBto from plasmid pKK/ppagC/C frag was ampliﬁed by PCR using primers ST52 and ST56 , digested with SphI and HindIII and ligated to pBRsspATetC - 1 that had been digested with SphI and HindIII . 
All the plasmids were transferred into strain JA08 by electroporation , generating the strains listed in Table 3 . 
2.5. Analysis of TetC expression in vitro
LB , supplemented with ampicillin where appropriate , in a 50 ml tube . 
Cells were harvested , washed in ice cold PBS and resuspended at an OD600 nm of 10/ml . 
Cells were lysed by sonication and the cell debris removed by centrifugation at 13,000 × g for 5 min . 
As the monoclonal anti-tetanus toxin fragment C antibody binds to SDS-denatured proteins weakly , an ELISA format was used to determine relative expression levels . 
Supernatants were diluted 1:10 in carbonate coating buffer pH 9.6 and dried down onto Nunc Maxisorb immunoplates overnight . 
Plates were blocked overnight in PBST containing 5 % skimmed milk and then probed using a 1:10,000 dilution of the monoclonal anti-tetanus toxin fragment C antibody . 
Bound antibody was detected using horserS . 
enterica strains were grown overnight in 50 ml of addish peroxidase conjugated goat anti-mouse immunoglobulins ( Dako ) . 
ELISAs were developed using 2,2 ′ - azino-bis ( 3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulfonic acid ) with H2O2 and the absorbance at 405 nm was read after incubation for 30 min at 28 ◦ C . 
The total amount of protein in each cell lysate was determined using a BCA Protein Determination Kit ( Pierce ) . 
The absorbance / g of total protein was calculated , and percentage expression determined compared to the strain with maximum expression ( JD04 ) . 
2.6. Analysis of β-galactosidase expression in vitro
Cultures of strain QD03 were grown in LB with shaking at 37 ◦ C to an OD 600 nm of 0.5 . 
Aliquots of cells were harvested and resuspended in pre-warmed PBS or M9 minimal media and incubated for 0.5 , 1 , 2 , and 3 h to mimic starvation conditions . 
Samples were also collected when the original LB culture reached an OD 600 nm of 0.5 , 2 and 3 . 
Harvested cells were cooled rapidly on ice , collected by centrifugation and washed in ice cold PBS before being resuspended at an OD 600 nm of 1/ml , and lysed by sonication . 
Cell debris was removed by centrifugation , and the - galactosidase activity in the supernatants analysed as described by Miller [ 14 ] . 
The total protein concentration was determined using a BCA Protein Assay Kit ( Pierce ) and the - galactosidase units per g of total protein determined . 
2.7. Immunization of BALB/c mice
OD600 nm of 0.5 , harvested , washed twice with ice cold PBS and resuspended at a concentration of 1010 c.f.u. / ml . 
Female 6 -- 7-week-old BALB/c mice ( Laboratory Animal Services , Adelaide ) were immunized orally via a 4 cm gastric lavage needle with 100 l of the bacterial suspension mixed with an equal volume of 3 % sodium bicarbonate in PBS immediately prior to immunization . 
Water was withdrawn from the mice 2 -- 3 h before immunization . 
All animal ethics protocols were approved by the University of Queensland Animal Ethics Committee . 
Cultures ( 300 ml ) of each vaccine strain were grown to an 
2.8. Measurement of serum antibody responses by ELISA
using enzyme linked immunosorbent assays ( ELISA ) using an end-point ELISA . 
Anti-toxoid responses were measured by coating Nunc Maxisorb immunoplates overnight at 4 ◦ C with 50 l of 2 Lf/ml tetanus toxoid ( CSL Ltd. , Parkville , Victoria , Australia ) in carbonate coating buffer ( pH 9.6 ) . 
Anti-Salmonella responses were measured using whole cell ELISAs . 
Strain JA08 was grown overnight in 50 ml LB in a 50 ml tube without shaking , washed in PBS and diluted to 0.2 OD600 nm/ml in carbonate coating buffer . 
A 50 l aliquot of bacterial cells was added to each well in a 96-well immunoplate , and dried onto the plate overnight . 
Afte Serum antibody responses against TetC were quantiﬁed blocking overnight in 5 % skim milk in PBST , serum samples were diluted into the plates and bound antibody detected as described previously . 
2.9. S. enterica colonization and stability in vivo
Mice ( three per strain ) were orally immunized with S. enterica strains and after 7 days spleens were isolated , homogenized using a 100 m cell strainer ( Becton Dickinson ) in 5 ml of 0.1 % Triton X-100 and incubated for 10 min . 
The total number of S. enterica and the number of plasmidcontaining S. enterica in each homogenate was determined by viable counts on LB and LB ampicillin plates . 
2.10. Statistics
Groups of unrelated data were compared using unpaired students t-test using the program Statview ( SAS Institute Inc. ) . 
A P-value of less than 0.05 indicates that the groups are signiﬁcantly different . 
3. Results
3.1. Identiﬁcation of highly active inducible promoters
ery were identiﬁed based on their reported high activity either under anaerobic or starvation conditions expected to be found within the in vivo host cells for Salmonella sp . 
The E. coli ( GenBank accession number M34277 ) and S. enterica ( GenBank accession number X69868 ) ansB promoters are both activated by anaerobiosis and a low level of catabolites [ 15,16 ] . 
The ansB gene encodes l-asparaginase II , involved in the hydrolysis of asparagine [ 15 ] . 
A mutant form of the E. coli ansB promoter , cf > FNR , which is only activated by anaerobiosis [ 15 ] was also examined . 
The transcription start points for all three promoters have been deﬁned [ 15,16 ] . 
protein ( SSP ) is induced under conditions of extreme starvation by 15 -- 20-fold , with up to 50 % of total protein synthesis in the cell derived from this promoter [ 17 ] . 
Although the function of SSP in E. coli is unknown , it has been suggested that it may be involved as a mediating factor between ppGpp and RNA polymerase [ 18 ] . 
SSP protein expression is dependent on a number of factors including growth rate , the presence of a functional relA gene and is induced by glucose , nitrogen , phosphate or amino acid starvation [ 19 ] . 
transcript start point mapped ( GenBank accession number X05088 ) [ 19,20 ] so BLAST analysis [ 21 ] was used to identify the Salmonella homologue from the Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium LT2 genome ( GenBank accession number AE008854 [ 22 ] ) . 
Five potential promoters ( Fig. 2 ) for chromosomal delivThe E. coli sspA gene encoding the stringent starvation The E. coli sspA promoter has been isolated and the 
3.2. Antibody responses induced by immunization with S. enterica harbouring promoter constructs derived from plasmid pBR322
The E. coli ansB and sspA , S. enterica ansB and sspA and the modiﬁed cf > FNR promoters were cloned into a pBR322 plasmid derivative upstream of the tetC gene encoding the Cterminal fragment of tetanus toxin ( TetC ) followed by a to terminator derived from pQE-30 ( see materials and methods ) . 
The pBR-promoter-TetC - to plasmids ( Fig. 1C ) were transferred into S. enterica strain JA08 . 
The promoter-TetC-to cassettes were subcloned into plasmid pCVDaroDins , yielding a suicide vector with the tetC gene under the control of each of the promoters ﬂanked by sequences from the aroD gene of S. enterica strain STM1 . 
These plasmids were used to transform E. coli strain S17 .1 pir and then conjugated into strain JA08 , resulting in ampicillin resistant S. enterica colonies in which the pCVDaroDins plasmids had recombined with the chromosomal aroD genes . 
All strains with chromosomal insertions selected for immunogenicity studies in this section contained a single crossover of the pCVDaroDins plasmid in the same orientation ( Fig. 1A ) . 
Mice were vaccinated at day 0 , 14 and 21 with 1 × 109 c.f.u. of bacteria and serum collected at day 35 and analysed by ELISA for anti-tetanus toxoid and anti-whole cell S. enterica antibodies . 
All promoters were tested in both single and multi-copy formats , except for the strain containing the cf > FNR promoter which was only tested as a single copy promoter . 
A negative control ( JA08 ) and positive control ( strain JB07 harbouring plasmid pKK/ppagC/C frag [ 3 ] which contains tetC under the control of the pagC promoter ) was included in each immunization experiment . 
No signiﬁcant differences were found between anti-whole cell S. enterica responses between the groups . 
However , only the positive control , plasmid pKK/ppagC/C frag generated an immune response against tetanus toxoid ( average titre of ∼ 20,000 , data not shown ) . 
Mean titres against tetanus toxoid for all of the test promoters ( E. coli ansB and sspA , S. enterica ansB and sspA , cf > FNR ) both in a single or multi-copy format showed no signiﬁcant difference ( unpaired t-test , p > 0.05 ) from the negative control ( typical titres of < 50 , result not shown ) . 
Either choice of promoter , plasmid instability , copy number , the choice of plasmid backbone or ribosomal terminator ( plasmid pKK/ppagC/C frag is based on plasmid pKK233-2 contains an rrnBT1T2 terminator ) may be inﬂu-encing the ability of the constructs to generate immunogenic levels of TetC in vivo . 
ently unstable in vivo , groups of three mice were inoculated once with S. enterica strains harbouring pBRansBETetC-and pKK/ppagC/fragC . 
After 7 days , spleens were isolated and homogenized and the proportion of ampicillin resistant to total numbers of S. enterica determined . 
The overall recovery rate of S. enterica from spleens was low ( 350 -- 750 colonies/per spleen ) . 
The recovery o To assess whether the pBR322-based plasmids are inherampicillin resistant to total S. enterica counts was 73 % for pKK/ppagC/C frag and 88 % for pBRansBETetC - , indicating that there appears to be no inherent instability in the pBR322-based plasmid compared to the pKK/ppagC/C frag plasmid . 
Fig. 2 . 
Comparison of the promoters used in Salmonella delivery systems in this work . 
The FNR and CRP consensus sequences are shown above their putative binding sites . 
Upper case indicates identity with the consensus sequence whereas lower case represents lack of identity . 
The start codon and transcriptional start sites are marked in bold . 
Boxed nucleotides are the putative -- 10 regions . 
The RBS sites are underlined and the putative 70 -- 35 region for the E. coli sspA promoter is doubly underlined . 
Regulatory proteins to which the promoters are reported to bind are indicated in brackets next to the name of the promoter . 
The transcriptional start point of the S. enterica has not been mapped . 
However , the S. enterica promoter is 85 % identical to the E. coli over the 189 bp upstream of the CDS with totally conserved sequences surrounding the putative − 35 and − 10 regions and RBS binding site . 
3.3. Antibody responses induced by immunization with S. enterica harbouring promoter constructs derived from plasmid pKK233-2
To test if the initial choice of the pBR322 plasmid vector was adversely inﬂuencing the ability of constructs to generate effective immune responses against TetC , the E. coli and S. enterica sspA promoters and the cf > FNR promoter ( the ansB promoter derivative with the highest in vitro expression ) were cloned into plasmid pKK/ppagC/C frag , replacing the pagC promoter and the resulting plasmids ( Fig. 1C ) were transferred to strain JA08 . 
All mice immunized with strains in which TetC expression was driven by the sspA promoters ( JD06 containing plasmid pKKsspATetC or PC01 containing pKKsspAETetC ) had tetanus toxoid speciﬁc antibody in their sera ( Fig. 3 ) . 
The level of these responses was similar to strain JB07 , containing the positive control plasmid pKK/ppagC/C frag . 
The cf > FNR promoter , the most powerful of the ansB derived promoters in vitro ( Table 4 ) , did not induce immunogenic levels of TetC expression ( titre < 50 , data not shown ) . 
Fig. 3 . 
Tetanus toxoid-speciﬁc serum antibody responses from groups of seven mice immunized orally . 
Each point represents the serum titre from an individual mouse examined 49 days after the initial immunization . 
JA08 : negative control , PC01 : pKKsspAETetC , PC02 : pKKsspATetC - , PC03 : pKKsspATetC - R , JD06 : pKKsspATetC , JB07 : pKK/ppagC/C frag . 
The titre was determined as the dilution giving a signal equal to that of the mean signal from a 1:40 dilution of the control JA08 group plus three standard deviations . 
The black bars represent the average signal from each group of seven mice 
3.4. Affect of plasmid backbone on immunogenicity of TetC expression cassettes
To determine why negative results were obtained with the sspA promoters using plasmid pBR322 as a delivery vector but not with the pKK233-2 based plasmids , experiments were designed to test whether the choice of plasmid backbone or terminator were important factors . 
The BamHI-containing tetC gene in pBRsspATetC - was replaced with the tetC gene from pKK/ppagC/C frag ( creating plasmid pBRsspATetC-1 ) and a second plasmid in which the to was replaced with the rrnBto terminator ( plasmid pBRsspATetC-R1 ) was constructed . 
Plasmid pKKsspATetC was modiﬁed to include a to terminator both in between the tetC and rrnBto terminator ( pKKsspATetC - R ) and as a direct replacement of the rrnBto ( pKKsspATetC - ) . 
Strain JA08 was transformed by electroporation with each of the four plasmids , and the resulting strains used to vaccinate mice . 
Sera derived from mice vaccinated with strain JE02 ( pBRsspATetC - 1 ) and strain JE07 ( pBRsspATetC-R1 ) did not contain signiﬁcantly increased antibody responses compared to the wild-type JA08 ( JE01 p = 0.21 , JE07 p = 0.25 , Fig. 4 ) although a single mouse vaccinated with JE02 generated a titre of 1:1000 , whereas strains JD06 ( pKKsspATetC which includes an rrnBto terminator ) , PC02 ( pKKsspATetC - ) and PC03 ( pKKsspATetC-1 ) all produced high immune responses ( Fig. 3 ) . 
Thus the choice of terminator does not appear to impact on the immune responses generated using these multi-copy plasmids . 
Plasmids pBRsspATetC-R1 and pKKsspATetC contain identical sspA promoter-tetC-rrnBto cassettes , and the plasmids are both derived from pBR322 , yet only the pK233-2 derived plasmid ( pKKsspATetC ) generates sufﬁcient expression of the TetC antigen to elicit an immune response in vivo . 
Under anaerobic conditions in vitro , the pBR322-based plasmids express lower levels of TetC than the isogenic pKK233-2-based plasmids , but higher levels than the chromosomally encoded sspA-tetC constructs , so the lack of immune responses does not appear to be directly related to the amount of in vitro expression of TetC ( Table 4 ) . 
Hence , it appears that the plasmid backbone is critical in determining whether a given promoter-antigen cassette can generate sufﬁcient levels of expression in vivo to elicit an immune response . 
3.5. Single copy antigen expression using the sspA promoter
Having conﬁrmed that the sspA promoters induced a strong immune response in multicopy , the S. enterica psspA-tetC-rrnBto cassette was subcloned into plasmid pCVDaroDins and transferred to JA08 so that expression of a single copy chromosomally located construct , recombined into the aroD gene , could be examined ( strain JD09 , Fig. 1B , Table 3 ) . 
To conﬁrm there was no further attenuation of the JA08 aroA strain by insertion of the expression cassette and consequent inactivation of the aroD , sera generated from mice immunized three times with vaccines containing the chromosomally encoded psspA-tetC-rrnBto cassette was analysed for antibodies directed against both whole cell S. enterica and tetanus toxoid . 
No signiﬁcant differences were observed between serum antibody responses directed against whole S. enterica cells from wild-type JA08 and strain JD09 . 
In addition when plasmid pKK/ppagC , expressing TetC from the strong pagC promoter , was present in strains with ( strain JD08 ) and without ( strain JB07 ) a psspA-lacZ double-crossover chromosomal insertion in the aroD gene , there was no signiﬁcant difference ( p = 0.84 ) in serum antibody responses against tetanus toxoid between strains . 
Hence , in keeping with previous reports that strains with both aroA and aroD mutations are effective vectors for antigen delivery [ 23 ] , insertion of an expression cassette and inactivation of the aroD gene in JA08 does not appear to increase the attenuation of this S. enterica strain . 
Double crossover constructs ( strain JD09 , tested in three separate experiments ) encoding S. enterica psspA-tetC-rrnBto consistently generated immune responses against tetanus toxoid in one to two mice out of the seven mice tested in each trial ( Fig. 5 , JD09 0.5 ) . 
Given that only one to two mice in each group vaccinated with double crossover constructs encoding S. enterica psspA-tetC-rrnBto developed immune responses , we hypothesised that increasing the amount of fragment C expression during vaccine preparation might enhance the immune responses against the vaccine . 
To accurately quantify the affect of a range of induction conditions on expression from the S. enterica sspA promoter , the expression of - galactosidase per g of total cellular protein from a strain ( QD03 ) harbouring a double crossover psspA-lacZ was measured . 
Cells were grown to an OD600 nm of 0.5 , harvested and transferred to either PBS or minimal media to mimic starvation conditions produced only small increases in - galactosidase . 
However , when cells were grown in LB and expression measured over a range of OD600 nm readings , the maximum expression was consistently observed at an OD600 nm of 2.0 with an average increase of 280 % ( ﬁve independent experiments ) ingalactosidase activity compared to an OD600 nm of 0.5 . 
This suggests that expression of the sspA promoter is induced as culture densities increase . 
A similar increase in expression was also seen when the expression level of TetC in sonicated supernatants of strain JD09 harbouring the S. enterica sspA-tetC-rrnBto cassette grown to an OD600 nm of two were compared to cells grown to an OD600 nm of 0.5 ( data not shown ) . 
To test if an increase in expression of TetC during vaccine preparation enhanced the anti-TetC immune response , vaccines were prepared by growing strain JD09 to an OD600 nm of either 0.5 or 2 and vaccinating mice with 1 × 109 cells from each preparation . 
All of the ﬁve mice vaccinated with cells grown to an OD600 nm of two and only one of the six mice vaccinated with cells grown to OD of 0.5 had clear immune 600 nm responses to TetC ( Fig. 5 ) , Anti-TetC immune responses from both groups were signiﬁcantly different from the control group ( OD600 nm of 2 , p = 0.009 and OD600 nm of 0.5 , p = 0.0456 respectively ) , but there were no signiﬁcant differences in anti-whole cell Salmonella responses between either groups and the control strain ( JA08 , p = 0.21 and p = 0.29 respectively ) . 
Hence , increasing the expression of TetC during vaccine preparation results in a profound increase in the immune response generated by the vaccine . 
Table 4 
In vitro expression and in vivo immunogenicity of vaccine strains Strain Promoter Plasmid backbone JA08 − − JB07 pagC pKK233-2 JD04 cf > FNR pKK233-2 JD06 sspA pKK233-2 JD09a sspAJE02 sspA pBR322 JE07 sspA pBR322 PC01 sspAE pKK233-2 PC02 sspA pKK233-2 PC03 sspA pKK233-2 QB06 # sspA pBR322 
Terminator − 
Relative TetC expression ( % ) 0 13 100 69 4 30 N/D 75 84 85 18 
Anti-toxoid response − + + + − + + + + + − + + + + + + + + − 
rrnB rrnB rrnB rrnB 
rrnB rrnB 
+ rrnB 
( # ) This strain has an extra BamHI site between the start codon and the rest of the tetC gene ; ( + + + ) high anti-toxoid titre ; ( + + ) all mice respond with signiﬁcant anti-toxoid titre ; ( + ) one or two mice with weak anti-toxoid titre ; ( − ) no anti-toxoid response ; N/D : not determined ; ( E ) E. coli derived promoter . 
a Double crossover chromosomal insertion . 
Fig. 4 . 
Tetanus toxoid-speciﬁc serum antibody titres from groups of mice immunized three times with either pBR322 or pKK233-2 based expression constructs with either or rrnB terminators.The titre was determined as the dilution giving a signal equal to that of the mean signal from a 1:40 dilution of the control JA08 group plus three standard deviations . 
The black bars represent the average signal from each group of mouse . 
JA08 : negative control ( seven mice ) JD06 : pKKsspATetC ( ﬁve mice ) , JE02 pBRsspATetC-1 ( seven mice ) , JE07 : pBRsspATetC-R1 ( seven mice ) . 
Fig. 5 . 
Tetanus toxoid-speciﬁc serum antibody responses from groups of mice immunized three times with chromosomally encoded tetC expression cassettes analysed 49 days after the initial vaccination . 
Each point represents the titre of serum from an individual mouse . 
The titre was determined as the dilution giving a signal equal to that of the mean signal from a 1:40 dilution of the control JA08 group plus three standard deviations The black bars represent the average signal from each group of mice . 
JA08 : wild-type ( seven mice ) and JD09 : chromosomal psspA-tetC grown either to OD600nm of 0.5 ( JD09 0.5 , six mice ) or two ( JD09 2 , ﬁve mice ) . 
4. Discussion
In this study , promoter expression cassettes cloned into plasmid pKK233-2 were able to generate immune responses when delivered using S. enterica in vivo , but antigen expressing cassettes cloned into plasmid pBR322 were not detectably immunogenic although both plasmid types were stably maintained in vivo . 
Initially , we proposed that the difference in serum antibody responses obtained from the two plasmids might be due to the ribosomal terminator used in the two plasmids . 
However , all derivatives of plasmid pKKsspATetC containing the rrnBto , to or both terminators generated high titre immune responses , whereas pBR322-derived plasmids with isogenic expression cassettes did not elicit signiﬁcant immune responses . 
This is surprising given that plasmid pKK233-2 is derived from plasmid pBR322 , with large regions of identity between the two plasmids ( Fig. 1C ) . 
Plasmids derived directly from pBR322 ( pBR322/TT ) [ 29 ] and from a ∆ rop derivative of pBR322 , pTETnir15 [ 5 ] have previously been used successfully to elicit immune responses . 
Other than the ∆ rop deletion , the plasmid backbone in pTETnir15 is identical to that of pBRsspATetC-R1 except that the pTETnir15 includes 564 nucleotides from the central section of the pBR322 tetracycline gene ( EagI-BamHI section ) that are found in pKKsspATetC but are not found in pBRsspATetC-R1 . 
Both plasmids pTETnir15 and the pBR322/TT have the antigen expression cassette in the same orientation as in pBRsspATetC-R1 . 
The only difference in common between the plasmid backbones of pKK/ppagC/C frag , pTETnir15 and pBR322/TT , all of which have been successfully used to deliver antigens and the pBRsspATetC-R1 plasmid backbone ( which failed ) is the absence of the EagI-BamHI section of the tetracycline gene from pBR322 in the latter . 
How this section could inﬂuence the expressio of immunogenic levels of TetC in vivo is subject to conjecture . 
However , under anaerobic conditions in vitro , plasmid pKKsspATetC - ( strain PC02 ) expresses at least twice as much TetC as the isogenic plasmid pBRsspATetC - 1 ( strain JE02 ) , hence it is possible that the level of expression from the pBR322-based plasmids in vivo is below that required to produce an immune response . 
Much of the work in developing and optimising live attenuated Salmonella antigen delivery systems has focussed on identifying promoters that are able to express immunogenic levels of antigens in vivo . 
Both the E. coli and S. enterica sspA promoters described here express immunogenic levels of TetC , generating high titres of anti-tetanus toxoid antibodies . 
In addition , the S. enterica sspA promoter is able to elicit anti-tetanus toxoid antibodies in some mice when the sspA-tetC expression cassette is integrated in the S. enterica chromosomal aroD gene . 
However , it is clear that not only the choice of promoter and replicon [ 29 ] , but also how expression constructs are assembled in the chosen plasmid is critical for the successful development of plasmid-based antigen delivery systems using attenuated S. enterica . 
Of the ﬁve potential expression promoters tested , only two , the E. coli and S. enterica sspA promoters , were able to elicit signiﬁcant immune responses against TetC in sera from mice vaccinated orally with S. enterica harbouring plasmids derived from pKK233-2 encoding promoter-tetC cassettes . 
Both the E. coli and S. enterica sspA promoters generated high titre immune responses in a multi-copy plasmid format from plasmids pKKsspATetC and pKKsspAETetC , and the S. enterica sspA promoter generates weak responses in some mice as a single chromosomal copy using our standard vaccine preparation conditions . 
The S. enterica and E. coli sspA promoters are highly similar ( 80 % identical ) with identical − 10 , − 35 and ribosomal binding site ( RBS ) sequences . 
In E. coli , expression of the sspA gene is induced under carbon , amino acid , nitrogen or phosphate starvation and during stationary phase [ 19 ] and also on infection with phage [ 24 ] . 
Under extreme starvation conditions the expression of SspA increases 15 -- 20-fold , making up at least 50 % of total protein synthesis [ 17 ] . 
Whilst the function of SspA in E. coli has not been determined it appears to interact with RNA polymerase and there is speculation that SspA is a transcriptional regulator in E. coli , particularly of promoters lacking conventional − 35 sequences that require additional factors in order to be transcribed [ 25 ] . 
Homologues of SspA in Yersinia enterocolitica [ 26 ] , Franscisella novocida [ 27 ] and Neisseria gonorrhoeae [ 28 ] regulate the expression of genes implicated in pathogenicity . 
In F. novocida , a transposon mutant in the sspA homologue mglA was deﬁcient in growth in macrophages , indicating that in this organism the sspA homologue is required for growth and survival in macrophages [ 27 ] . 
Hence , it is likely that the closely related E. coli and S. enterica sspA promoters are highly expressed in vivo , leading to expression of immunogenic levels of TetC , resulting in the induction of high titres of anti-toxoid speciﬁc antibodies . 
When the S. enterica psspA-tetC cassette was inserted into the S. enterica chromosomal aroD gene , weak immune responses were repeatedly observed in one to two mice of each group of seven vaccinated with strains containing double crossover S. enterica psspA-tetC-rrnBto expression cassettes ( strain JA08 ) . 
However , when the vaccine preparation conditions were changed to maximise expression of TetC by growing cells to an OD600 nm of two rather than 0.5 , all mice vaccinated had clear immune responses against TetC , conﬁrming sspA as a useful promoter for single copy expression of heterologous antigens in S. enterica . 
Interestingly , the highest expressed promoter in vitro , the cf > FNR promoter did not induce detectable levels of antibodies against TetC either when inserted in the chromosome ( data not shown ) or as a multi-copy pKK-based plasmid construct . 
Hence , from the results described here and in Dunstan et al. ( 1999 ) it is clear that it is almost impossible to predict from in vitro expression studies under conditions mimicking those found in vivo or by analysis of promoter regulation whether or not a promoter will express immunogenic levels of antigen in vivo . 
Acknowledgements
Tetanus toxoid for ELISAs and plasmid pKK/ppagC/C frag were a gift from Prof. Richard A. Strugnell , University of Melbourne , Australia . 
S. enterica strain STM1 was a gift from Prof. P. Coloe , RMIT University , Melbourne , Australia . 
Plasmid pCVD442 and DH5 pir were kindly provided by Prof. Michael S. Donnenberg , University of Maryland , USA . 
Dr Tamsin Terry 's position and work in the Jennings laboratory was supported by an ARC Linkage Grant LP0218929 and Bioproperties ( Australia ) Pty Ltd. . 
We would like to express our heartfelt thanks to Craig Dickfos for his technical assistance . 
References 
[ 1 ] Ward SJ , Douce G , Figueiredo D , Dougan G , Wren BW . 
Immunogenicity of a Salmonella typhimurium aroA aroD vaccine expressing a nontoxic domain of Clostridium difﬁcile toxin A. Infect Immun 1999 ; 67 ( 5 ) :2145 -- 52 . 
[ 2 ] Yang DM , Fairweather N , Button LL , McMaster WR , Kahl LP , Liew FY . 
Oral Salmonella typhimurium ( AroA - ) vaccine expressing a major leishmanial surface protein ( gp63 ) preferentially induces T helper 1 cells and protective immunity against leishmaniasis . 
J Immunol 1990 ; 145 ( 7 ) :2281 -- 5 . 
[ 3 ] Dunstan SJ , Simmons CP , Strugnell RA . 
Use of in vivo-regulated promoters to deliver antigens from attenuated Salmonella enterica var . 
Typhimurium . 
Infect Immun 1999 ; 67 ( 10 ) :5133 -- 41 . 
[ 4 ] Chatﬁeld SN , Charles IG , Makoff AJ , Oxer MD , Dougan G , Pickard D , et al. . 
Use of the nirB promoter to direct the stable expression of heterologous antigens in Salmonella oral vaccine strains : development of a single-dose oral tetanus vaccine . 
Biotechnology ( N Y ) 1992 ; 10 ( 8 ) :888 -- 92 . 
[ 5 ] Roberts M , Li J , Bacon A , Chatﬁeld S. Oral vaccination against tetanus : comparison of the immunogenicities of Salmonella strain 
expressing fragment C from the nirB and htrA promoters . 
Infect Immun 1998 ; 66 ( 7 ) :3080 -- 7 . 
[ 6 ] McSorley SJ , Xu D , Liew FY . 
Vaccine efﬁcacy of Salmonella strains expressing glycoprotein 63 with different promoters . 
Infect Immun 1997 ; 65 ( 1 ) :171 -- 8 . 
[ 7 ] Alderton MR , Fahey KJ , Coloe PJ . 
Humoral responses and salmonellosis protection in chickens given a vitamin-dependent Salmonella typhimurium mutant . 
Avian Dis 1991 ; 35 ( 3 ) :435 -- 42 . 
[ 8 ] Levine MM , Kaper JB , Lockman H , Black RE , Clements ML , Falkow S. Recombinant DNA risk assessment studies in humans : efﬁcacy of poorly mobilizable plasmids in biologic containment . 
J Infect Dis 1983 ; 148 ( 4 ) :699 -- 709 . 
[ 9 ] Garmory HS , Titball RW , Grifﬁn KF , Hahn U , Bohm R , Beyer W. Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium expressing a chromosomally integrated copy of the Bacillus anthracis protective antigen gene protects mice against an anthrax spore challenge . 
Infect Immun 2003 ; 71 ( 7 ) :3831 -- 6 . 
[ 10 ] Roland K , Curtiss 3rd R , Sizemore D. Construction and evaluation of a delta cya delta crp Salmonella typhimurium strain expressing avian pathogenic Escherichia coli O78 LPS as a vaccine to prevent airsacculitis in chickens . 
Avian Dis 1999 ; 43 ( 3 ) :429 -- 41 . 
[ 11 ] Hone DM , Harris AM , Chatﬁeld S , Dougan G , Levine MM . 
Construction of genetically deﬁned double aro mutants of Salmonella typhi . 
Vaccine 1991 ; 9 ( 11 ) :810 -- 6 . 
[ 12 ] Donnenberg MS , Kaper JB . 
Construction of an eae deletion mutant of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli by using a positive-selection suicide vector . 
Infect Immun 1991 ; 59 ( 12 ) :4310 -- 7 . 
[ 13 ] Apicella MA , Grifﬁss JM , Schneider H. Isolation and characterization of lipopolysaccharides , lipooligosaccharides , and lipid A. Methods Enzymol 1994 ; 235:242 -- 52 . 
[ 14 ] Miller JH . 
Assay of - galactosidase . 
In : Experiments in molecular [ 15 ] Jennings MP , Beacham IR . 
Co-dependent positive regulation of the [ 16 ] Jennings MP , Scott SP , Beacham IR . 
Regulation of the ansB gene [ 17 ] Reeh S , Pedersen S , Friesen JD . 
Biosynthetic regulation of individual [ 18 ] Williams MD , Fuchs JA , Flickinger MC . 
Null mutation in the stringenetics . 
New York : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Harbor ; 1972 . 
ansB promoter of Escherichia coli by CRP and the FNR protein : a molecular analysis . 
Mol Microbiol 1993 ; 9 ( 1 ) :155 -- 64 . 
of Salmonella enterica . 
Mol Microbiol 1993 ; 9 ( 1 ) :166 -- 73 . 
proteins in relA + and relA strains of Escherichia coli during amino acid starvation . 
Mol Gen Genet 1976 ; 149 ( 3 ) :279 -- 89 . 
gent starvation protein of Escherichia coli disrupts lytic development of bacteriophage P1 . 
Gene 1991 ; 109 ( 1 ) :21 -- 30 . 
[ 19 ] Williams MD , Ouyang TX , Flickinger MC . 
Starvation-induced expression of SspA and SspB : the effects of a null mutation in sspA on Escherichia coli protein synthesis and survival during growth and prolonged starvation . 
Mol Microbiol 1994 ; 11 ( 6 ) :1029 -- 43 . 
[ 20 ] Fukuda R , Yano R , Fukui T , Hase T , Ishihama A , Matsubara H. Cloning of the Escherichia coli gene for the stringent starvation protein . 
Mol Gen Genet 1985 ; 201 ( 2 ) :151 -- 7 . 
[ 21 ] Altschul SF , Madden TL , Schaffer AA , Zhang J , Zhang Z , Miller W , et al. . 
Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST : a new generation of protein database search programs . 
Nucleic Acids Res 1997 ; 25 ( 17 ) :3389 -- 402 . 
[ 22 ] McClelland M , Sanderson KE , Spieth J , Clifton SW , Latreille P , Courtney L , et al. . 
Complete genome sequence of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium LT2 . 
Nature 2001 ; 413 ( 6858 ) :852 -- 6 . 
[ 23 ] Roberts M , Chatﬁeld S , Pickard D , Li J , Bacon A. Comparison of abilities of Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium aroA aroD and aroA htrA mutants to act as live vectors . 
Infect Immun 2000 ; 68 ( 10 ) :6041 -- 3 . 
[ 24 ] Drahos DJ , Hendrix RW . 
Effect of bacteriophage lambda infection on synthesis of groE protein and other Escherichia coli proteins . 
J Bacteriol 1982 ; 149 ( 3 ) :1050 -- 63 . 
[ 25 ] Hansen AM , Lehnherr H , Wang X , Mobley V , Jin DJ . 
Escherichia coli SspA is a transcription activator for bacteriophage P1 late genes . 
Mol Microbiol 2003 ; 48 ( 6 ) :1621 -- 31 . 
[ 26 ] Badger JL , Miller VL . 
Expression of invasin and motility are coordinately regulated in Yersinia enterocolitica . 
J Bacteriol 1998 ; 180 ( 4 ) :793 -- 800 . 
[ 27 ] Baron GS , Nano FE . 
MglA and MglB are required for the intramacrophage growth of Francisella novicida . 
Mol Microbiol 1998 ; 29 ( 1 ) :247 -- 59 . 
[ 28 ] De Reuse H , Taha MK . 
RegF , an SspA homologue , regulates the [ 29 ] Dunstan SJ , Simmons CP , Strugnell RA . 
In vitro and in [ 30 ] Bolivar F , Rodriguez RL , Greene PJ , Betlach MC , Heyneker [ 31 ] Simon R , Priefer U , Puhler A . 
A broad host range mobilization expression of the Neisseria gonorrhoeae pilE gene . 
Res Microbiol 1997 ; 148 ( 4 ) :289 -- 303 . 
vivo stability of recombinant plasmids in a vaccine strain of Salmonella enterica var . 
Typhimurium . 
FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 2003 ; 37 ( 2 -- 3 ) :111 -- 9 . 
HL , Boyer HW . 
Construction and characterization of new cloning vehicles . 
II . 
A multipurpose cloning system . 
Gene 1977 ; 2 ( 2 ) :95 -- 113 . 
system for in vivo genetic engineering : transposon mutagenesis in Gram-negative bacteria . 
Bio/Technology 1983 ; 1:784 -- 91