FOODBORNE PATHOGENS AND DISEASE Volume 1 , Number 3 , 2004 © Mary Ann Liebert , Inc. . 
Detection of a Novel Virulence Gene and a Salmonella a coli Isolated 
Virulence Homologue Among Escherichi Chickens 
from Broiler 
CESAR MORALES ,1 MARGIE D. LEE ,1,2 CHARLES HOFACRE ,1 and JOHN J. MAURER1 ,2 
ABSTRACT 
Despite the diversity of Escherichia coli pathotypes , there are many virulence genes common to isolates from food animals and humans , suggesting that opportunity exists for genetic exchange between human and animal isolates to create the next emerging , foodborne pathogen . 
Hemolytic activity in E. coli has been attributed to hemolysin genes found in either uropathogenic or enterohemorrhagic E. coli . 
These E. coli hemolysins are classified as RTX toxins due to a repetitive toxin domain and similar gene organization , sequence homology , and mechanism of action and presence in animal and human E. coli isolates . 
Certain hemolytic animal isolates , however , lack these E. coli hemolysin genes . 
Recently , we identified a hemolysin from E. coli , isolated from poultry , with significant homology to the K12 `` silent '' hemolysin gene she . 
This gene was present only in one of four hemolytic , avian E. coli isolates examined , suggesting that the other three E. coli contain a gene distinct from the RTX toxin genes , hlyA and the she homolog , hlyE . 
A phagemid library was made from chicken E. coli isolate 963726 , which was negative for hemolysin gene hlyA and hlyE . 
A hemolytic clone was identified from this library , which contained a 3.3-kb Sau3A DNA insert . 
The nucleotide sequences of this DNA insert revealed two , open reading frames ( ORF ) . 
The first ORF encoded for a 40-Kdal protein with no significant homology to known hemolysins reported in the GenBank DNA/Protein database . 
The second ORF specified a 26-Kdal protein with significant homology to a Salmo-nella regulatory gene mig-14 that had a broad distribution among the pathogenic , animal E. coli isolates . 
Deletion of the second orf did not abrogate hemolysis , indicating that the first ORF encoded the hemolysin . 
This new bacterial gene designated hlyF represents a new class of hemolysin . 
INTRODUCTION 
posed for antibiotic resistance ( Smith et al. , 2002 ) , food animal commensals may also serve as an important reservoirs for virulence genes . 
Pathogenic avian E. coli is similar to other E. coli associated with extraintestinal and gastrointestinal illnesses in humans and domestic animals ( Bertin et al. , 1998 ; Plos et al. , 1989 ; Paciorek , 2002 ; Whittam and Wilson , 1988 ) . 
Although both groups are genetically diverse ( Maurer et al. , 1998 ; Whittam and Wilson , 1988 ) , they can share common virulence factors , including K1 capsule ( Whittam and Wilson , 1988 ) and P pili ( Plos et al. , 1989 ) . 
ALTHOUGH THE MAJORITY of Escherichia coli isolates are normal , benign residents of the gastrointestinal tract , a small percentage are pathogenic and cause a variety of diseases ranging from diarrhea to septicemia . 
Since commensal and pathogenic E. coli can occupy the same food animal host , there is ample opportunity to disseminate , exchange , or amplify virulence genes via mobile genetic elements , including phages ( Acheson et al. , 1998 ) and plasmids ( Brynestad et al. , 2001 ) . 
Thus , as pro ¬ 
1Poultry Diagnostic Research Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia. 2Center for Food Safety and Quality Enhancement, College of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences, University of Georgia, Griffin, Georgia.
16 
The alpha-hemolysin , hlyA , is a virulence fac - T3 and T7 sequencing primers from the tor commonly found in uropathogenic E. coli phagemid vector pBK-CMV . 
Additional sub-and other E. coli that cause extraintestinal dis - clones were generated for sequencing from the ease . 
This hemolysin belongs to a family of pro- restriction enzyme digests ( PstI or HindIII ) of teins known as RTX toxin ( Beutin , 1991 ; Welch , pCM1 , self-ligation of the cut plasmid , and 1991 ) . 
Similar to other RTX toxins , hlyA resides transformation of E. coli K12 with the ligated in an operon with the three accessory genes -- DNA . 
Subcloning with restriction enzymes PstI hlyB , hlyC , and hlyD -- necessary for the toxin 's and HindIII yielded two new plasmids : pCM2 activation and export . 
These hly genes are ab - and pCM3 , respectively ( Fig. 1 ) . 
Further se-sent from hemolytic and non-hemolytic avian quencing of these subclones involved using E. coli ( Reingold et al. , 1999 ) . 
Recently , a new standard sequencing primers , T3 and T7 , as type of hemolysin was found in an E. coli iso - well as primers generated from DNA sequence late with significant homology to the E. coli K12 of plasmids pCM2 and pCM3 . 
An alignment of `` silent '' hemolysin gene she ( del Castillo et al. , complete and partial sequence of plasmids 1997 ) . 
This new gene , hlyE , is distinct from the pCM1 , pCM2 , and pCM3 was accomplished common RTX hemolysins in that it lacks the using Generunner 3.04 v DNA analysis softconserved amino acid sequence and accessory ware ( Hastings Software , Hastings , NY ) , which genes of RTX toxins . 
This hlyE gene was found provided the complete sequence of the original in only one of four hemolytic avian E. coli iso - 3.3-kb insert of pCM1 . 
In silico DNA analysis lates , however , suggesting that there existed identified two potential open reading frames . 
other unique hemolysin genes in pathogenic E. coli ( del Castillo et al. , 1997 ; Reingold et al. , 1999 ) . 
In this paper , we identify one other unique E. coli hemolysin adjacent to a gene with significant homology to the Salmonella virulence gene , mig-14 . 
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cloning and sequencing of E. coli hemolysin gene 
The lambda-ZAP vector pBK-CMV ( Statagene , La Jolla , CA ) was used to construct a phagemid library of a hemolytic avian E. coli isolate , 963726 . 
A Sau3A partial restriction enzyme digest of E. coli DNA was ligated to BamHI-treated pBK-CMV and packaged into lamba phage particles using MaxPlax lamba phage mix ( Statagene , La Jolla , CA ) . 
The lambda library was cotransduced with helper phage ExAssistTM ( Stratagene ) into E. coli MC1061 , selecting for kanamycin-resistant colonies on sheep blood agar plates ( BAP ) . 
A hemolytic clone was identified from this initial screen and designated pCM1 . 
All plasmids were isolated using WIZARD Plus Maxipreps DNA Purification System ( Promega ; Madison , WI ) and submitted to MGIF for automated fluorescent sequencing . 
Plasmid pCM1 was initially sequenced using 
FIG. 1 . 
Genetic map of hlyF locus in avian E. coli 963726 . 
A hemolytic clone , pCM1 ( 3.3 kb Sau3A DNA insert ) was identified from lZAP library of avian E. coli 963726 on BAP . 
Subclones , pCM2 ( 2.5 kb DNA insert ) and pCM3 ( 1.1 kb DNA insert ) were generated for sequencing from the restriction enzyme digests of pCM1 with PstI or HindIII , respectively , and self-ligation . 
Through primer walking of pCM1 and the two pCM1 subclones pCM2 and pCM3 , the complete sequence of the cloned insert was determined and revealed two genes : hlyF and orf2 . 
The first gene , hlyF , had 79 % identity ( 89 % similarity ) with an ORF present in E. coli IncF plasmid p1658/97 ( GenBank accession no . 
NC 004998 ) and 58 % identity ( 77 % similarity ) with Y. pestis YPO1559 ( Deng et al. , 2002 ) . 
The second gene , orf2 had significant nucleotide and amino acid homology , 49.6 % identity and 66.5 % similarity , to Salmonella typhimurium gene mig-14 and 72 % and 82 % identity and similarity , respectively , with 2nd ORF following HlyF homologue previously identified on E. coli IncF plasmid p1658/97 
The putative identity for each open reading ORF responsible for the hemolytic phenotype , frame ( ORF ) was done through a homology subsequent subcloning was done to generate search using the National Center for Biotech - two additional plasmids pCM2 and pCM3 ( Fig . 
nology Information ( www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov ) 1 ) . 
Escherichia coli K12 strains containing either Basic Blast Search ( Altschul et al. , 1990 ) . 
Nu - plasmid was weakly hemolytic on sheep blood cleotide and amino acid sequences have been agar . 
Both plasmids contained the first ORF , deposited in the NIH/Genbank database ; the while in pCM3 the second ORF was deleted . 
In accession number is AF155222 . 
pCM2 , the animo terminal one-third of the ORF1 was deleted . 
The rest of the ORF1 codPolymerase chain reaction ing sequence was in frame with lacZ of the plasmid vector , pCMV . 
The remaining coding se-PCR was performed to identify distribution quence of ORF1 in pCM2 was sufficient to of the second ORF among animal and human convey hemolysis on E. coli K12 with the plas-E . 
coli isolates . 
Templates for PCR were pre - mid . 
The second ORF , orf 2 was not essential to pared by boiling cells for 10 min , pelleting the hemolysis since deletion of its gene sequence cells by centrifugation ( 10,000 3 g for 30 min ) , did not abrogate this phenotype in E. coli K12 and diluting the supernatant 1/10 in distilled containing plasmid pCM3 . 
From the evidence water . 
One microliter of each E. coli template presented here , we determined that ORF1 was was added to a 9-mL PCR reaction mix . 
The re - responsible for the hemolysis phenotype , and action mix contained 0.2 mM dNTP 's , 3.0 mM therefore we decided to designate this new MgCl2 , 1 3 PCR buffer ( 50 mM Tris ; pH 7.4 ) , gene as hlyF . 
ORF1 encoded a 40.8-Kdal pro-BSA ( 0.25 mg/L ) , 50 pmoles forward ( 59AAC - tein , which did not exhibit significant homol-TAAATGCTCCTGTGC39 ) and reverse ( 59GG - ogy to any reported hemolysin or toxin , or mo-GTAATAAGGTGTTCTCC39 ) PCR primers , and tifs common to bacterial toxins ( Table 1 ) . 
one unit of Taq DNA polymerase ( Boehringer However , this ORF1 , that we designated as Mannheim , Indianapolis , IN ) . 
The PCR reac - HlyF , had 79 % identity ( 89 % similarity ) with tion mix was drawn up into a 10-mL capacity an ORF present in E. coli IncF plasmid thin-walled capillary tube and placed in an p1658/97 ( GenBank accession no . 
NC 004998 ) Idaho Technology Rapidcycler ™ ( Idaho Falls , and 58 % identity ( 77 % similarity ) with Yersinia ID ) ( Wittwer et al. , 1989 ) . 
The program para - pestis YPO1559 ( Deng et al. , 2002 ) . 
meters were as follows : 94 °C for 0 sec , 45 °C for The second ORF encoded a 26.4-Kdal protein 0 sec , and 72 °C for 15 sec for 30 cycles . 
The PCR with significant nucleotide and amino acid hoproducts were analyzed by gel electrophoresis mology , 49.6 % identity and 66.5 % similarity , to using 1.5 % agarose , 1 3 TAE at 80 V . 
The stan - Salmonella typhimurium gene mig-14 ( macrodards used for determining the molecular phage-induced gene , 14 ) . 
ORF2 also demonweight of the PCR products was a 100-bp lad - strated 72 % and 82 % identity and similarity , der ( Promega ) . 
E. coli strains 963726 and K12 respectively with 2nd ORF following HlyF ho-strain LE392 served as positive and negative mologue previously identified on E. coli IncF controls , respectively , for PCR . 
A no DNA tem - plasmid p1658/97 . 
Both hlyF and orf2 had 81 % plate control was also included as another con - identity at the nucleotide level with IncF trol in monitoring for PCR contamination . 
p1658/97 plasmid sequences and had the same tandem of hlyF and orf2 genes as those identified on 3.3 kb Sau3A DNA insert in pCM1 . 
We were surprised that one of our E. coli genes had significant homology with Salmo-A hemolytic E. coli K12 clone was identified nella virulence gene ( mig-14 ) , since few E. coli from a hemolytic , avian E. coli 963726 plasmid virulence genes have been shown to share any library . 
This plasmid , pCM1 , contained a 3.3 - significant homology with comparable Salmo-kb Sau3A DNA insert . 
Analysis of the complete nella genes ( Groisman and Ochman , 1993 ) . 
We DNA sequence revealed two tandem open were interested in determining whether this reading frames ( ORF ) . 
In order to identify the new E. coli gene had a broad distributio 
RESULTS
among pathogenic E. coli . 
We used PCR to de - homologue . 
Both genes differ from the recently termine the distribution of this mig-14 homo - identified hlyE gene ( Reingold et al. , 1999 ) and logue among various hemolytic E. coli isolates previously classified E. coli hemolysin hlyA obtained from different animal sources . 
This ( RTX toxins ) , in that we did not find the RTX gene was present in five of 23 ( 22 % ) hemolytic signature motif L/I/F-X-G - G-X-G-N / D-D-X animal isolates and one of 5 ( 20 % ) hemolytic ( Welch , 1991 ) in either gene . 
Neither were we human isolates as determined by PCR ( Table able to identify any homology to the pore-form-2 ) . 
None of the bovine isolates were positive for ing hemolysins of Staphylococcus aureus ( Gouaux , the mig-14 homologue . 
Only human E. coli iso - 1998 ) or Aeromonas salmonicida ( Rossjohn et al. , lates associated with urinary tract infections 1998 ) . 
Of the two ORF , only ORF-2 revealed ( UTI ) were positive for this gene . 
any significant homology to another polypeptide with known function . 
With homology to the Salmonella gene mig-14 at the nucleotide and amino acid level , orf2 may serve a similar function in E. coli . 
Salmonella within the phagolyso-In this study , we demonstrate sequence char - somal compartment in the macrophage cell acterization of a novel E. coli hemolysin . 
Se - produce Mig14 . 
This gene product appears to quencing the DNA insert identified two , tan - be essential to the virulence of the organism in dem ORF , designated hlyF and orf2 , a mig-14 mice ( Valdivia and Falkow , 1997 ) . 
Mig14 ap ¬ 
DISCUSSION
Swine ( 9 ) Colibacillosis 9/9 ( 100.0 ) ND Canine ( 2 ) UTI 2/2 ( 100.0 ) 2/2 ( 100.0 ) Human ( 9 ) Diarrhea 0.9 ( 0.0 ) 9/9 ( 100.0 ) Human ( 5 ) UTI 4/5 ( 80.0 ) 5/5 ( 100.0 ) aPathogenic E. coli isolated from clinical cases in a variety of animals , including humans . 
bDisease associated with E. coli infections , including extraintestinal diseases like UTI and colibacillosis , and diarrheal illnesses . 
Bacterial isolates associated with human diarrhea were enterohemorrhagic E. coli O157 : H7 . 
cHemolysis on sheep blood agar plates . 
dDistribution of RTX toxin genes associated with either uropathogenic E. coli or enterohemorrhagic E. coli among clinical E. coli isolates was assessed by either PCR or Southern . 
eDistribution of E. coli mig-14 homologue among clinical isolates pears to be essential to Salmonella persistence species . 
Like E. coli mig-14 , the Salmonella gene in spleen and liver ( Valdivia et al. , 2000 ) , damp - is preceded by another virulence gene , in this ens inflammatory response in mice ( Valdivia et case , a homologue to Shigella regulatory , virual. , 2000 ) , and protects the bacterial cell against lence gene virK ( Valdivia et al. , 2000 ) . 
Like the cationic , antimicrobial peptides ( Brodsky et al. , bacterial toxins , CNF and HlyA ( De Rycke et al. , 2002 ) . 
The E. coli mig-14 homologue does not 1999 ) , hlyF and the E. coli mig-14 homologue appear to be essential to hemolysis , since its have a broad distribution , across host animal deletion does not abrogate this phenotype in E. species , among E. coli associated with extraincoli with plasmids containing the first ORF des - testinal infections , possibly due to their resiignated hlyF . 
However , the E. coli mig-14 ho - dence on a transmissible , genetic element . 
mologue may serve a function similar to the Salmonella gene in other hemolytic , pathogenic E. coli , as this gene appeared to be present in pathogenic E. coli primarily associated with extraintestinal disease . 
Plasmids are important vectors for transmit-HlyF contains a secretory sequence in the ting virulence factors , such as toxins and ad-amino-terminal end of this protein that is char - hesins ( De Rycke et al. , 1999 ) , among E. coli asacteristic of the signal , leader peptide sequence sociated with intestinal and extraintestinal present in many sec-dependent , secreted pro- illnesses in humans and animals , and it may be teins ( Izard and Kendall , 1994 ) . 
Most virulence that the possession of these virulence plasmids factors have their own secretion machinery that is what distinguishes pathogen from commen-is requisite for the protein 's own export sal ( Van Bost et al. , 2003 ) . 
As enterohemor - ( Hueck , 1998 ) . 
However , HlyF appears to rely rhagic E. coli is an amalgam , representing on the cell 's regular export machinery , which essential combination of virulence genes of diis involved in the export of most outermem - verse bacterial origins ( Boerlin 1999 ) , these two brane and periplasmic proteins ( Izard and new genes -- hlyF and orf2 -- may represent the Kendall , 1994 ) . 
emergence of new virulence factors among hlyF demonstrated no significant homology pathogenic E. coli strains . 
Twelve percent of dito any known hemolysin or toxin genes cur - arrheal illnesses in the United States are of unrently available in the GenBank database . 
Sim - known etiology ( Hall et al. , 2001 ) . 
With an ilarly , there were no recognizable hemolysin ever expanding wealth of genetic information domains indicating that HlyF was not related and improvements in microarray-based apto HlyE family of pore-forming hemolysins proaches to identification and characterization ( Wallace et al. , 2000 ) . 
of bacterial pathogens ( van Ijperen et al. , 2002 ) , Plasmids are important in the lateral transfer the etiology and source for these currently un-and subsequent evolution of bacterial diagnosed foodborne illnesses may be elucipathogens , including E. coli ( Boerlin , 1999 ) , and dated , through inclusion of these virulence therefore it is not surprising to identify common gene sequences in microarray chip screening . 
genes from related organisms , like Salmonella In combination with these other virulence and Yersinia , in E. coli , linked to a transmissible genes , hlyF may prove useful as a marker for plasmid . 
With the percentage of GC content distinguishing pathogen from commensal , anlower than E. coli housekeeping genes ( 37 % and imal versus human source . 
35 % GC vs. 52 % GC ) , both genes appear to have had evolved from a common ancestor and disseminated to several pathogens , during the course of their evolution . 
At some point , there was a fortuitous , physical linkage between HlyF This study was supported in part by USDA and Mig-14 . 
The Salmonella mig-14 is present at Formula Funds 98-435 . 
Special thanks to Lydia loci with a series of other genes that are unique Bass , Dylan Burnette , Charles Hertz , Marie to this genus , and this gene appeared to be ac - Maier , and Allan Renè de Cotret for their tech-quired early in the evolution of the Salmonella nical assistance 
REFERENCES