Developmentally Regulated Intestinal Expression of IFN- γ and Its Target Genes and the Age-Specific Response to Enteric Salmonella Infection
This information is current as of October 14 , 2018 . 
Sue J. Rhee , W. Allan Walker and Bobby J. Cherayil 
J Immunol 2005 ; 175:1127 -1136 ; ; doi : 10.4049 / jimmunol .175.2.1127 
http://www.jimmunol.org/content/175/2/1127 
References This article cites 60 articles , 16 of which you can access for free at : http://www.jimmunol.org/content/175/2/1127.full#ref-list-1 
Why The JI ? 
Submit online . 
• Rapid Reviews ! 
30 days * from submission to initial decision 
• No Triage ! 
Every submission reviewed by practicing scientists 
• Fast Publication ! 
4 weeks from acceptance to publication 
* average 
Subscription 
Information about subscribing to The Journal of Immunology is online at : http://jimmunol.org/subscription 
Permissions Submit copyright permission requests at : http://www.aai.org/About/Publications/JI/copyright.html 
Email Alerts Receive free email-alerts when new articles cite this article . 
Sign up at : http://jimmunol.org/alerts 
The Journal of Immunology is published twice each month by The American Association of Immunologists , Inc. , 1451 Rockville Pike , Suite 650 , Rockville , MD 20852 Copyright © 2005 by The American Association of Immunologists All rights reserved . 
Print ISSN : 0022-1767 Online ISSN : 1550-6606 . 
I nfectious diarrhea remains a leading cause of pediatric morbidity and mortality . 
Over the past several decades , global efforts have focused on preventing transmission and promoting the use of oral rehydration therapy to reduce this threat . 
However , despite these efforts , diarrheal disease in children still results in 1.5 -- 2.5 million deaths/year worldwide ( 1 , 2 ) . 
Within the United States alone , acute gastroenteritis accounts for 1.5 million ofﬁce visits , 200,000 hospitalizations , and 300 deaths/year ( 3 ) . 
One of the most common infectious agents isolated from cases of acute gastroenteritis is Salmonella , with serovar Typhimurium being the most frequent isolate . 
The incidence of infection is highest in infants 1 year of age with a rate of 134 cases/100 ,000 children ( 4 ) . 
3 S. typhimurium that is introduced into the gastrointestinal ( GI ) tract via contaminated food or water adheres to and invades epi-thelial cells of the intestine , particularly the M cells overlying Peyer 's patches . 
The process of invasion is an active one in which bacterial effector proteins introduced into host cells by a type III 
Mucosal Immunology Laboratory , Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit , Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School , Charlestown , MA 02129 Received for publication February 17 , 2005 . 
Accepted for publication May 12 , 2005 . 
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . 
This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . 
1 This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health RO1AI48815 ( to B.J.C. ) , RO1DK070260 ( to W.A.W. ) , and T32DK07477 ( to S.J.R. ) . 
S.J.R. is the recipient of a Harvard Medical School Fellowship in Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition . 
2 Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Bobby J. Cherayil , Massachu-setts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School , Building 114 , Room 3400 , 16th Street , Charlestown , MA 02129 . 
E-mail address : cherayil@helix.mgh.harvard.edu 3 Abbreviations used in this paper : GI , gastrointestinal ; MPO , myeloperoxidase ; Ct , threshold cycle . 
secretion system induce cytoskeletal rearrangements that result in engulfment of the Salmonella by large membrane protrusions ( 5 ) . 
The effector proteins also activate a number of cellular signaling pathways , leading to the acute inﬂammatory response that is responsible for the manifestations of gastroenteritis ( 6 ) . 
In most individuals , this response is sufﬁcient to clear the infection so that systemic dissemination of the organism is unusual . 
However , young infants , particularly those 3 mo of age , have a high risk for complications resulting from extraintestinal spread of Salmo-nella , including sepsis , osteomyelitis , meningitis , and death ( 7 -- 9 ) . 
It is not clear why young infants are so prone to spread of S. typhimurium from the gut . 
It may be part of a more generalized impairment of intestinal defense against enteric pathogens because other systemic infections in this age group often originate in the GI tract ( 10 ) . 
Inadequate development of epithelial barrier functions and mucosal immunity may underlie this phenomenon ( 11 ) , but the exact molecular basis for this immaturity , as well as the factors involved in the normal maturation of protective responses , are yet to be elucidated . 
To better understand the age-speciﬁc differences in the intestinal response to bacteria , we have made use of the mouse model of Salmonella infection . 
Although infection of mice with S. typhi-murium typically results in a systemic infection without overt intestinal inﬂammation , recent studies by Barthel et al. ( 12 ) have shown that following pretreatment of the animals with oral streptomycin , infection with a virulent , streptomycin-resistant strain of Salmonella results in a robust and reproducible inﬂammation of the cecum . 
The pathologic changes demonstrated in this murine model closely resembled the intestinal inﬂammation caused by S. typhimurium infection in humans . 
We have used this approach to compare the responses of young mouse pups ( preweaned , 16 -- 18 days old ) and their adult ( 5 -- 6 wk old ) counterparts to oral infection with Salmonella . 
Developmentally Regulated Intestinal Expression of IFN - and 
Its Target Genes and the Age-Speciﬁc Response to Enteric Infection1 
Salmonella 
Sue J. Rhee , W. Allan Walker , and Bobby J. Cherayil2 
Young infants are highly susceptible to systemic dissemination of enteric pathogens such as Salmonella typhimurium when compared with older individuals . 
The mechanisms underlying this differential susceptibility have not been deﬁned clearly . 
To better understand this phenomenon , we examined the responses of adult mice and preweaned pups to oral infection by S. typhimurium . 
We found clear age-speciﬁc differences , namely , an attenuated intestinal inﬂammatory response and a higher systemic bacterial burden in the pups compared with the adults . 
To elucidate the molecular basis for these differences , we obtained a microarraybased proﬁle of gene expression in the small intestines of uninfected adult and preweaned animals . 
The results indicated a striking age-dependent increase in the intestinal expression of a number of IFN - - regulated genes involved in antimicrobial defense . 
This ﬁnding was conﬁrmed by real-time quantitative PCR , which also demonstrated an age-dependent increase in intestinal expression of IFN - . 
The developmental up-regulation of the IFN - - regulated genes was dependent on both IFN - and a normal commensal microﬂora , as indicated by experiments in IFN - - knockout mice and germfree mice , respectively . 
However , the increase in expression of IFN - itself was independent of the commensal ﬂora . 
The functional importance of IFN - in the immunological maturation of the intestine was conﬁrmed by the observation that the response of adult IFN - - knockout animals to S. typhimurium infection resembled that of the wild-type pups . 
Our ﬁndings thus reveal a novel role for IFN - in the developmental regulation of antimicrobial responses in the intestine . 
The Journal of Immunology , 2005 , 175 : 1127 -- 1136 . 
0022-1767/05 / $ 02.00 
Copyright © 2005 by The American Association of Immunologists , Inc. . 
C57BL/6 ( B6 ) and B6.129S7-Ifngrtm1Agt / J mice ranging in age from 5 days to 10 wk old were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory and Charles River Laboratories . 
BALB/c mice ranging in age from 5 days to 6 wk old were obtained from Charles River Laboratories . 
Tissue obtained from 6-wk-old BALB/c germfree mice were kindly provided by Dr. N. Nantha-kumar ( Massachusetts General Hospital , Charlestown , MA ) . 
These mice were obtained from the Gnotobiotic Animal Core at the University of North Carolina . 
Animals were sacriﬁced within the germfree facility , intestinal tissue was removed under sterile conditions , snap frozen in liquid nitrogen , and stored at 80 °C until use . 
All animal studies were approved by the Massachusetts General Hospital Subcommittee on Research Animal Care and conformed to the U.S. Department of Agriculture Animal Welfare Act , Public Health Service Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory Animals , and other applicable laws and regulations . 
Quantitation of commensal bacteria
Sixteen - to 18-day-old and 6-wk-old B6 mice ( three of each age group ) were treated with streptomycin ( 12 and 20 mg , respectively ) via the orogastric route for 24 h and then sacriﬁced . 
The terminal ileum and colon from these animals , as well as from age-matched , untreated controls , were removed , rinsed free of contents , homogenized in 1 ml of sterile PBS , and serial dilutions of the homogenates plated on Luria-Bertani agar for culture under aerobic and anaerobic conditions . 
Culturable commensal ﬂora were quantiﬁed as colony-forming units per milligram of tissue . 
The limit of detection equaled 250 CFU/mg tissue . 
Salmonella typhimurium infection
Five - to 6-wk-old B6 mice were housed in groups of up to four animals under standard barrier conditions in a speciﬁc pathogen-free facility . 
Sixteen - to 18-day-old B6 litters of up to eight were housed with a lactating female . 
Water and food were supplied ad libitum . 
Adult mice were pretreated with 20 mg of streptomycin , and pups were pretreated with 12 mg of streptomycin via the orogastric route . 
At 24 h following streptomycin treatment , 5 - to 6-wk-old and 16 - to 18-day-old animals were infected with 1 108 and 3 107 CFU of the streptomycin-resistant S. typhimurium strain SL1344 , respectively . 
At 48 h postinfection , mice were sacriﬁced by CO2 asphyxiation . 
Tissue samples from the small intestine , cecum , colon , and spleen were removed for additional analysis . 
Small intestine and cecum were rinsed of fecal contents with sterile PBS . 
Intestinal tissue and spleen were homogenized using 1 ml of sterile 1 % Triton X-100 . 
The numbers of colony-forming units were determined by plating serial dilutions on Luria-Bertani streptomycin and incubating at 37 °C for 24 h. 
Histologic analysis
Segments of ileum , cecum , and colon were rinsed free of contents and embedded in Tissue Tek OCT ( Sakura Finetek ) , snap frozen in liquid nitrogen , and stored at 80 °C . 
Tissue samples were then transferred and ﬁxed in parafﬁn . 
Sections ( 5 or 10 m ) were mounted on glass slides , air dried , and stained with H&E . 
Immunoperoxidase staining was performed using a goat polyclonal IgG anti-mouse IDO Ab ( 1/50 dilution ) ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) . 
Myeloperoxidase (MPO) assay
Whole cecum was resected , rinsed free of contents in sterile PBS , and homogenized in 1 ml of 0.05 % hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide ( HTAB ) buffer . 
Samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for 1 min and then immediately thawed at 37 °C for 10 min for a total of three such cycles . 
Samples were then sonicated on ice for 20 s and centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min . 
MPO activity in the clariﬁed sonicate was then estimated by a colorimetric assay as described in detail earlier ( 13 ) 
Gentamicin protection assay
Overnight cultures of SL1344 were collected by centrifugation at 6000 g for 10 min , washed with sterile PBS , and resuspended in antibiotic-free tissue culture medium . 
Macrophages were harvested from the peritoneum of adult B6 mice on the fourth day after injection of sterile thioglycollate broth as described previously ( 14 ) . 
MODE-K cells ( kindly provided by Dr. R. Blumberg ( Brigham and Women 's Hospital , Boston , MA ) were cultured in DMEM with 10 % FCS . 
Cells were left untreated ( control ) or were pretreated overnight with 10 ng/ml recombinant murine IFN - ( R&D Systems ) . 
The cells were infected with 107 bacteria ( multiplicity of infection of 10:1 ) . 
After 1 h of infection , cells were washed with sterile PBS and placed in DMEM with 100 g/ml gentamicin for 2 h to kill extracellular bacteria . 
The cells were then lysed either immediately or after an additional 18 h in 10 g/ml gentamicin , and the number of intracellular bacteria was determined at each time point by culturing serial dilutions of cell lysates , as described in detail earlier ( 15 ) . 
Isolation of intestinal epithelial cells 
Materials and Methods Mice 
Epithelial cells were isolated from B6 mice ranging in age from 14 days to 8 wk old as per the methods described by Evans et al. ( 16 ) . 
In brief , the small intestine ( from the terminal ileum to the ligament of Treitz ) was resected , dissected open , cut into 2 - to 3-mm pieces , and rinsed clean in 50 ml of Ca2 - and Mg2 - free HBSS at room temperature . 
Tissue was then diced into 1-mm3 pieces , incubated with 20 ml of enzyme solution ( 0.1 mg/ml dispase type I and 300 U/ml collagenase type XI ( Sigma-Aldrich ) ) for 30 min with agitation at 80 cycles/min . 
The cell suspension was pipetted vigorously for 3 min and left to sediment under gravity for 1 min . 
The supernatant was collected and added to 10 ml of DMEM 2.5 % FCS with 2 % sorbitol and centrifuged at 1000 g for 2 min . 
This process was repeated until the supernatant was clear , and the pellet was well deﬁned . 
The cell pellet was resuspended in DMEM 2.5 % FCS . 
Viability was assessed by staining cells with trypan blue solution ( 0.4 % ) and quantiﬁed with a hemacytometer . 
Purity of the preparation was analyzed by FACS analysis after staining with the TROMA-1 epithelial cell-speciﬁc marker ( Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank , University of Iowa ) ( 17 ) . 
We routinely obtained preparations containing 90 % epithelial cells . 
Microarray-based gene expression proﬁling
Experiment design . 
To investigate the molecular basis of the age-depen-dent differences in response to Salmonella described above , a microarraybased gene expression proﬁling analysis was performed on RNA prepared from intestinal epithelial cells of uninfected preweaned pups and postweaned adult mice to detect changes in the expression of genes involved in the immune response . 
A direct comparison of gene expression at different stages of development was made . 
Hybridizations were performed in triplicate . 
Sample RNA preparation . 
Total RNA was extracted and puriﬁed from intestinal epithelial cells ( isolated as described in Materials and Methods ) from 16 - and 33-day-old B6 mice ( TRIzol reagent , Invitrogen Life Technologies ; RNeasy column , Qiagen ) . 
Samples were pooled from ﬁve separate animals to yield a total quantity of 30 g of RNA for each group . 
RNA quantity and quality were assessed by using a Beckman Coulter DU 640 Spectrophotometer ( Beckman Coulter ) and Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer ( Agilent ) , according to the manufacturer 's protocols . 
Extract preparation and labeling . 
Brieﬂy , two samples ( a reference and a test ) of isolated total RNA were reverse transcribed into amine modiﬁed cDNA . 
This cDNA was labeled via a coupling reaction to the Cy3 or Cy5 dyes , then puriﬁed and concentrated for hybridization . 
The protocol used was a modiﬁed version of the Atlas Powerscript Fluorescent Labeling kit ( Clontech 634712 ) protocol , and full details are available online ( https://dnacore.mgh.harvard.edu/microarray/protocol-labeling.shtml ) . 
Hybridization procedures and parameters . 
For direct comparison , Cy3-and Cy5-labeled cDNA samples were resuspended in hybridization buffer and then hybridized to a PGA Mouse v1 .0 array ( MGH_Mm_01 ) slide made available through the Microarray Core Facility at the Massachusetts General Hospital . 
Both preweaned and postweaned samples were hybrid-ized to the same slide , and each set of hybridizations was performed in triplicate . 
Full details regarding the hybridization protocol are available online ( https://dnacore.mgh.harvard.edu/microarray/protocol-hybridization.shtml ) . 
Measurement data and speciﬁcations . 
BioArray Software Environment ( 18 ) and GenMAPP ( 19 , 20 ) software programs were used for data analysis . 
Statistical signiﬁcance ( p value ) was calculated by Student 's t test based on the results of three separate hybridizations . 
Array design . 
A PGA Mouse v1 .0 array ( MGH_Mm_01 ) was made available through the Microarray Core Facility at the Massachusetts General Hospital . 
A total of 14,609 oligonucleotides was arrayed onto 384-well Genetrix polystyrene V-bottom plates ( X6004 ) . 
Full details regarding the microarray printing protocol are available online ( https://dnacore.mgh.harvard.edu/microarray/protocol-printing.shtml ) . 
Spe-ciﬁc details characterizing the individual spots on the array are available at the following web site : https://dnacore.mgh.harvard.edu/microarray/ﬁles/anno_ dist-MGH_Mm_01.txt . 
Quantitative real-time PCR
Total RNA was extracted from homogenized tissue using TRIzol reagent ( Invitrogen Life Technologies ) and following the manufacturer 's protocol . 
RNA was reverse transcribed with random hexamers using a GeneAmp RNA PCR kit ( Applied Biosystems ) , and the cDNA was ampliﬁed using iQ 
2 SYBR Green Supermix ( Bio-Rad ) and 7.5 M of each primer as spec-iﬁed below . 
Ampliﬁcation with GAPDH primers was conducted on all samples . 
Forty cycles of ampliﬁcation were performed on duplicate cDNA samples , with cycle parameters set as follows : 95 °C at 1 min ; 54 °C at 1 min ; and 72 °C at 2 min . 
The threshold cycle ( Ct ) , the cycle number at which the ﬂuorescence of the ampliﬁed product crosses a speciﬁc threshold value in the exponential phase of ampliﬁcation , was determined . 
The mean Ct value for each transcript was normalized by subtracting from it the mean Ct value for the GAPDH transcript for that sample . 
The change in normalized transcript level was expressed relative to the control sample , with a change of n in Ct representing a 2n-fold difference . 
Primer sequences
Primer sequences were as follows : GAPDH , sense , 5 - CCTGCACCAC CAACTGCTT-3 , and antisense , 5 - ATGACCTTGCCCACAGCCT-3 ; CCL5 , sense , 5 - ATATGGCTCGGACACCACTC-3 , and antisense , 5-CCAAGCTGGCTAGGACTAG-3 ; CXCL9 , sense , 5 - GGGCATCATCT TCCTGGAGC-3 , and antisense , 5 - CTTCCTTGAACGACGACG-3 ; CXCL10 , sense , 5 - AAGGACGGTCCGCTGCAAC-3 , and antisense , 5-GTCCATCCATCGCAGCACCG-3 ; IDO , sense , 5 - GACCACCACATA GATGAAG-3 , and antisense , 5 - GGCCCAACTTCTCTGAGAGC-3 ; IFN - , sense , 5 - TCAAGTGGCATAGATGTGGAAGAA-3 , and antisense , 5 - TGGCTCTGCAGGATTTTCATG-3 ; and TNF - sense 5 - AT GAGCACAGAAAGCATGATC-3 , and antisense , 5 - TACAGGCTTGT CACTCGAATT-3 . 
Results
Age-speciﬁc differences in the response to oral infection with Salmonella
Based on the protocol described by Barthel et al. ( 12 ) , 16 - to 18-day-old ( preweaned ) and 5 - to 6-wk-old ( adult ) B6 mice were pretreated with a single dose of streptomycin per os and then inoculated orally 24 h later with the streptomycin-resistant strain of S. typhimurium , SL1344 . 
The doses of both the streptomycin and the bacteria were adjusted to the weight of the animals . 
The basal number of gut commensal bacteria that could be cultured from the adult animals was 270-fold higher than in the pups . 
The streptomycin treatment signiﬁcantly reduced the number of culturable commensals in both age groups ( from 6350 CFU/mg intestinal tissue to 250 CFU/mg tissue -- the limit of detection -- in the case of the pups ; from 1.73 106 to 1.13 104 CFU/mg in the case of the adults ) . 
The animals were sacriﬁced 48 h after the infection , and the inﬂammatory response in the cecum was assessed by his-topathology , increase in MPO activity ( as a measure of neutrophil recruitment ) , and up-regulation of the proinﬂammatory cytokine TNF - . 
At the same time , homogenates of the ileum and spleen were cultured to determine the number of bacteria in these tissues . 
The pretreatment with streptomycin alone did not appear to elicit an inﬂammatory response in the intestine , either by gross appearance or by histopathology , nor were there any appreciable differences between the adult mice and the pups ( Fig. 1A ) . 
However , following 48 h of infection with SL1344 , there was a marked thickening of the cecal wall in the infected 5 - to 6-wk-old mice compared with the streptomycin-pretreated , uninfected agematched controls upon gross inspection . 
Microscopically , an inﬂammatory response was evidenced by marked submucosal edema and cellular inﬁltrate of the lamina propria ( Fig. 1 , B and C ) . 
In contrast , infection did not appreciably alter the gross appearance of the cecum in the 16 - to 18-day-old mice . 
On histologic analysis in the younger animals , both the degree of submucosal edema and inﬂammatory inﬁltration were less than in the adults ( Fig. 1 , B and C ) . 
To obtain a more quantitative assessment of the intestinal inﬂammation , we measured tissue MPO activity as an indicator of neutrophil inﬁltration , one of the characteristic features of Salmo-nella-induced enteritis ( 13 , 21 , 22 ) . 
The results of this analysis demonstrated that there was a 37.6-fold ( 11.3 , p 0.007 ) increase in activity in the infected adult mice compared with uninfected controls ( Fig. 1D ) . 
In comparison , there was only a 1.06-fold ( 0.44 , p 0.05 ) increase in MPO activity in the infected 18-day-old mice , indicating a lower level of neutrophil recruitment than in the adults , consistent with the histopathological ﬁndings . 
Given the role of TNF - in the recruitment of neutrophils to sites of Salmonella infection ( 23 ) , and in the defense against this organism ( 24 ) , we examined cecal expression of this cytokine by quantitative real-time PCR . 
Following infection , there was a 14.6-fold ( 0.28 , p 0.02 ) increase in TNF - transcript levels in the 5 - to 6-wk-old mice . 
In contrast , infection-induced up-regulation of TNF - was signiﬁcantly less ( p 0.01 ) in the 16 - to 18-day-old pups : there was only a 7.06-fold ( 1.57 , p 0.02 ) increase in the level of the transcript ( Fig. 1E ) . 
Taken together , the results of the histopathologic evaluation , MPO assay , and TNF - real-time PCR analysis all indicated that there was a decreased intestinal inﬂammatory response in the preweaned pups compared with the adult mice following infection with S. typhimurium . 
This result was not altered even if the adult doses of streptomycin , and Salmonella were administered to the pups ( data not shown ) . 
As mentioned above , S. typhimurium infection in the mouse is typically associated with invasion of the epithelium via the Peyer 's patches in the small intestine , particularly the ileum , and dissemination of the organism to extraintestinal sites such as the spleen . 
Therefore , to determine whether there were age-dependent differences in local and systemic infection , cultures of the ileum and spleen were performed 48 h after oral infection of preweaned pups or adult mice with SL1344 . 
The results demonstrated that there was a signiﬁcantly greater number of bacteria in both the ileum ( 3161 2065 vs 434 318 , p 0.04 ) and the spleen ( 9410 5656 vs 872 160 , p 0.0007 ) of the pups compared with the adult mice , respectively ( Fig. 1 , F and G ) . 
Thus , the less pronounced intestinal inﬂammatory response in the pups was associated with a greater local and systemic burden of bacteria . 
Age-dependent changes in intestinal gene expression
To investigate the molecular basis of the age-dependent differences in response to Salmonella described above , a microarray-based gene expression proﬁling analysis was performed on RNA prepared from small intestinal epithelial cells of preweaned pups and adult mice to detect changes in the expression of genes involved in the immune response . 
The RNA samples were reverse transcribed , then hybridized to a PGA Mouse v1 .0 array ( MGH_Mm_01 ) slide ( made available through the Microarray Core Facility at the Massachusetts General Hospital ) containing 14,609 oligonucleotides . 
Following quality control analysis , 6791 usable signals were identiﬁed . 
Data from the microarray were further analyzed using a web-based software program BioArray Software Environment ( https://base.mgh.harvard.edu ) ( 18 ) . 
A direct comparison of expression was made between the preweaned and the adult stages of development for each gene and was quantiﬁed as a fold change . 
A fold change 1.0 indicated an increase in expression of that particular gene in the adult , whereas a value 1.0 represented a decrease in expression . 
Results from the microarray demonstrated an age-dependent increase in a number of antimicrobial , IFN - - regulated genes . 
In contrast , there were no statistically signiﬁcant differences in expression of housekeeping genes such as GAPDH , pyruvate carboxylase , 2-microglobulin , and cyclophilin A . 
There were a total of 460 genes in which there was at least a 2-fold , statistically signiﬁcant increase in expression with aging . 
Of these , there were 
33 genes that were classiﬁed by the BioArray Software Environment and GenMAPP programs ( 18 -- 20 ) under the biologic process of `` immune response . '' 
More strikingly , of these 33 immune response genes , 10 were IFN - regulated . 
In addition , there were at least another ﬁve IFN - - regulated genes identiﬁed by inspection whose expression increased signiﬁcantly in an age-dependent manner ( Table I ) . 
The IFN - - regulated genes included several che-mokines involved in innate and adaptive immunity ( 25 ) , members of a GTPase family implicated in resistance to intracellular infection ( 26 ) , and other proteins such as the polyimmunoglobulin receptor , which is required for the transport of secretory Ig across mucosal surfaces ( 27 ) , and IDO , which has been shown to be involved in both innate defense against several types of pathogens and in the regulation of lymphocyte activation ( 28 , 29 ) . 
Intriguingly , one of the genes in this list was IFN-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 , the orthologue of which was recently identiﬁed as being up-regulated in the intestine of gnotobiotic zebraﬁsh following colonization with bacteria ( 30 ) , suggesting that the increased expression of IFN - - induced genes may be an evolutionarily conserved feature of gut maturation . 
Of note , the results of the microarray analysis did not reveal any differences in the expression of IFN - or the IFN - R Based on the potential importance of the IFN - - regulated genes in antimicrobial defense and immunoregulation , we focused additional attention on this group . 
We proceeded to conﬁrm the microarray ﬁndings by quantitative real-time PCR . 
Of the IFN -- regulated genes identiﬁed on the microarray , CCL5 , CXCL9 , and IDO were selected for quantitative real-time PCR analysis because these had the greatest fold change and are representative IFN-induced chemokines and a protein involved in antibacterial defense and immunoregulation . 
As shown in Fig. 2A , the expression of all three genes increased signiﬁcantly with age by 15 - , 10 - , and 
FIGURE 1 . 
Age-speciﬁc differences in response to oral infection with Salmonella . 
Preweaned ( 16 -- 18 days old ) and adult ( 5 -- 6 wk old ) B6 mice were treated with streptomycin alone ( A ) or streptomycin and SL1344 ( B and C ) . 
Sections of cecum were stained with H&E . 
Preweaned tissues were examined at 20 ( B ) and 40 ( C ) original magniﬁcation . 
Adult tissues were examined at 10 ( B ) and 40 ( C ) original magniﬁcation . 
The inﬂammatory response in the cecum following infection with SL1344 was assessed by MPO activity ( D ) and TNF - quantitative realtime PCR ( E ) . 
Colonization of ileum ( F ) and spleen ( G ) following infection with SL1344 was assessed by bacterial culture . 
The histograms of D -- G represent the mean and SD of results from two separate experiments involving at least two animals per group . 
1000-fold , respectively , between 1 and 6 wk of age . 
Similar changes were seen regardless of whether RNA from puriﬁed intestinal epithelial cells or whole intestinal tissue was used for the analysis . 
Initial experiments with intestinal epithelial cell RNA failed to reveal any signiﬁcant age-dependent changes in IFN-expression ( data not shown ) . 
However , when we analyzed IFN-expression in RNA prepared from total small intestinal tissue ( including epithelial and nonepithelial components ) , an age-depen-dent increase in expression of this cytokine was in fact observed ( Fig. 2B ) , indicating that the source of IFN - in the intestine is likely to be a nonepithelial cell type . 
Given the robust developmental increase in the IDO transcript , we performed immunohistochemistry to evaluate for differences in protein expression and to localize the cellular source of IDO . 
Sections of ileum from preweaned pups and adults were stained with an anti-mouse IDO Ab . 
As can be seen in Fig. 2 , C and D , the intensity of anti-IDO staining was appreciably stronger in the adult tissue , in keeping with the age-dependent increase in transcript levels . 
Both epithelial cells and subepithelial lamina propria cells were found to be stained , which is consistent with the widespread expression pattern of this protein ( 28 ) . 
Staining of the adult sections with an isotype-matched control Ab did not show any staining ( data not shown ) . 
Age-dependent changes in intestinal gene expression are regulated by IFN - and the commensal microﬂora Although the expression of CCL5 , CXCL9 and IDO is known to be regulated by IFN - , these genes could be regulated by other factors in the intestinal microenvironment . 
Therefore , we wished to determine whether IFN - was in fact required for the age-dependent increase in expression of these genes in the intestine . 
Quantitative real-time PCR was performed on RNA from intestinal tissue obtained from preweaned and adult B6 IFN - - knockout mice and their age-matched wild-type controls . 
As shown in Fig. 3A , the age-dependent increase in expression of CCL5 , CXCL9 , and IDO that normally occurs in the wild-type mice was signiﬁcantly attenuated in the IFN - - knockout animals , indicating that IFN - is required for the normal developmental increase in expression of these genes in the intestine . 
One important change that occurs during the weaning period is the colonization of the intestine with commensal ﬂora , and it is well-known that commensal bacteria can inﬂuence gene expression in the intestinal epithelium , both in mammals and in lower vertebrates ( 30 , 31 ) . 
To determine whether the commensal ﬂora was involved in the age-dependent increase in expression of the IFN - - regulated genes in the intestine , quantitative real-time PCR for CCL5 , CXCL9 , and IDO was performed on RNA prepared from the ileum of adult germfree and conventionally raised mice . 
Because the only germfree mice available to us were of the BALB/c strain , we ﬁrst demonstrated that the expression of these genes did in fact increase in an age-dependent manner in BALB/c mice as in the B6 animals ( Fig. 3B ) . 
When expression of CCL5 , CXCL9 , and IDO was analyzed in adult germfree BALB/c mice , it was found to be signiﬁcantly less than in the age-matched conventionally reared counterparts and was similar to that of the conventionally raised preweaned BALB/c pups ( Fig. 3B ) . 
Thus , there was a signiﬁcant attenuation of the normal developmental increase in IFN - - regulated gene expression in the germfree mice , suggesting that the commensal ﬂora is involved in regulating expression of these genes . 
Table I. Microarray-based analysis of IFN - - regulated gene expression in the developing intestinea 
Gene Name ( Gene Symbol ) Fold Change pb 
IFN-inducible transmembrane protein 3 ( Iﬁtm3 ) 2.13 IFN-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 ( Iﬁt1 ) 2.43 Protein kinase , IFN-inducible double-stranded RNA dependent ( Pkr ) 2.51 IFN regulatory factor 7 ( Irf7 ) 2.79 IFN-activated gene 203 ( Iﬁ203 ) 2.96 IFN - inducible protein ( Iﬁ47 , IRG47 ) 3.12 Polymeric immunoglobulin receptor ( Pigr ) 4.52 Monokine induced by IFN - ( CXCL9 ) 5.48 IFN-induced 15-kDa protein ( G1p2 ) 7.45 IFN - - induced GTPase ( Iigp2 ) 8.69 Indoleamine pyrrole 2,3-dioxygenase ( Indo , IDO ) 16.81 - IFN-inducible gene ( CXCL10 ) 31.59 IFN-induced protein 44 ( Iﬁ44 ) 45.68 IFN-inducible protein ( Iﬁ1 , LRG47 ) 73.88 Regulated upon activation , normal T cell expressed and secreted ( CCL5 ) 89.56 a A direct comparison of gene expression was made between RNA prepared from adult and preweaned intestinal epithelial cells . 
( ratio of adult : preweaned expression ) with values 1.0 , indicating an increased expression in the adult samples . 
b Statistical signiﬁcance was determined using Student 's t test on the results of three separate hybridizations . 
0.0003 0.005 0.0004 0.001 0.04 0.006 0.001 0.0001 0.0002 0.02 0.02 0.005 0.008 0.0007 0.009 
Differences were quantiﬁed as a fold change 
FIGURE 2 . 
Age-dependent changes in intestinal gene expression . 
Expression of the IFN - - regulated genes CCL5 , CXCL9 , and IDO ( A ) as well as IFN-itself ( B ) in the ileum of preweaned ( 1 wk ) , weaning ( 3 wk ) , and adult ( 6 wk ) B6 mice was measured by quantitative real-time PCR ( qRT-PCR ) . 
Immunoperoxidase staining of IDO was performed on sections of ileum from uninfected preweaned ( C ) and adult ( D ) B6 mice . 
The means and SD in the histograms of A and B are from two separate experiments involving at least two animals per experiment . 
We also examined the effect of the commensal ﬂora on IFN-expression in the intestine . 
In contrast to the results for CCL5 , CXCL9 , and IDO , the level of IFN - expression in the intestine of adult germfree mice was not signiﬁcantly different from the conventionally reared controls ( Fig. 3C ) , suggesting that the commensal ﬂora did not play a major role in the age-dependent increase in IFN - in the gut . 
IFN - enhances antimicrobial mechanisms of intestinal epithelial cells and macrophages in vitro The results presented so far indicate an important role for IFN - in the developmental changes in gene expression in the intestine . 
Some of these IFN - - regulated genes have been implicated in antimicrobial defense at the cellular level ( 26 , 28 ) , suggesting that one of the effects of IFN - may be to increase epithelial resistance to bacterial infection . 
To evaluate this possibility , we examined the effect of IFN - on the murine small intestinal epithelial cell line MODE-K , which has been shown previously to be responsive to this cytokine ( 32 ) . 
MODE-K cells , pretreated overnight with 10 ng/ml rIFN - or left untreated , were infected with S. typhimurium strain SL1344 , and the number of bacteria present inside control or IFN - - treated cells was determined at 2 and 20 h after infection by gentamicin protection assay ( 15 ) . 
Thioglycollate-elicited perito-neal macrophages from adult B6 mice were evaluated similarly in parallel . 
As shown in Fig. 4A , the IFN - treatment decreased the number of bacteria surviving in the MODE-K cells by 50 % at the 20-h time point . 
This effect was seen as early as 6 h postinfection ( data not shown ) . 
There was no difference in the number of intracellular bacteria at 2 h postinfection , suggesting that the IFN-is unlikely to be affecting the number of bacteria that initially entered the cells . 
IFN - treatment had a similar , even more dramatic , effect on the survival of Salmonella inside the thioglycollate-elicited peritoneal macrophages ( Fig. 4B ) . 
Thus , IFN - acts on two cell types present in the intestinal mucosa , enterocytes , and macrophages to enhance microbicidal mechanisms that limit the intracellular growth of Salmonella . 
FIGURE 3 . 
Effects of IFN - and the commensal microﬂora on age-dependent changes in intestinal gene expression . 
Expression of the IFN - - regulated genes CCL5 , CXCL9 , and IDO in the ileum of preweaned ( 7 days old ) and adult ( 6 wk old ) wild-type ( IFN - / ) and IFN - - knockout ( IFN - / ) B6 mice was measured by quantitative real-time PCR ( qRT-PCR ) ( A ) . 
Wild-type data are the same as those shown in Fig. 2 . 
In addition , expression of these genes ( B ) and IFN - itself ( C ) was measured in germfree ( G.F. ) BALB/c mice and conventionally reared , age-matched BALB/c controls . 
The histogram of A represents the means and SD of results from two separate experiments involving at least two animals per experiment . 
The histograms of B and C represent the means and SD of results from a single experiment performed on two separate animals . 
IFN - inﬂuences the intestinal response to Salmonella and systemic growth of bacteria in vivo We addressed the in vivo role of IFN - in the age-speciﬁc differences in response to enteric Salmonella infection by infecting adult IFN - - knockout mice with S. typhimurium and comparing their response to those of the wild-type adult animal . 
As before , the inﬂammatory response in the cecum was assessed by histology , MPO assay , and TNF - quantitative real-time PCR . 
Histologic analysis revealed less submucosal edema and decreased lamina propria inﬂammatory inﬁltrate in the adult IFN - - knockout animals compared with the age-matched , wild-type controls ( Fig. 5 , A and B ) . 
Similarly , both the MPO assay and the TNF - real-time PCR demonstrated a signiﬁcantly attenuated response in the adult IFN - - knockout mice compared with wild-type animals ( Fig. 5 , C and D ) . 
Compared with uninfected controls , there was only a 13.3-fold ( 3.2 , p 0.02 ) increase in MPO activity in the IFN -- knockout mice as opposed to a 37.6-fold ( 11.27 , p 0.007 ) increase in the wild-type animals . 
With regard to TNF - gene expression , there was only a 5.85-fold ( 0.51 , p 0.01 ) increase in transcript levels following infection in the IFN - - knockout mice compared with a 13.8-fold ( 0.51 , p 0.0001 ) increase in the wild-type animals . 
To determine whether there were IFN - - depen-dent differences in local and systemic bacterial numbers , cultures of the ileum and spleen were performed . 
The results demonstrated that there was a signiﬁcantly greater number of bacteria in the spleen of IFN - - knockout mice compared with the wild-type controls ( Fig. 5E ) . 
There was also a trend toward greater numbers of bacteria in the ileum of the IFN - - knockout mice , although this did not reach statistical signiﬁcance ( data not shown ) . 
Overall , the responses of the adult IFN - - deﬁcient mice resembled those of the wild-type pups , an observation that is consistent with the idea that the cytokine is required for the normal maturation of the response to enteric Salmonella infection . 
FIGURE 4 . 
Effect of IFN - on intracellular growth of Salmonella in macrophages and intestinal epithelial cells . 
Intestinal epithelial cells ( A ) and thioglycollate-elicited peritoneal macrophages ( B ) were pretreated with IFN - and subsequently infected with Salmonella . 
The number of intracellular bacteria was measured at 2 and 20 h postinfection . 
The means and SD are from triplicate wells and are representative of at least two separate experiments . 
FIGURE 5 . 
Effect of IFN - on the intestinal response to Salmonella and systemic growth of bacteria . 
Adult IFN - - knockout mice were pretreated with streptomycin and infected with Salmonella . 
Sections of cecum from these animals ( A ) were stained with H&E and examined at 10 magniﬁcation and compared with those of age-matched wild-type mice ( B ) . 
The inﬂammatory response in the cecum following infection with SL1344 was assessed by MPO activity ( C ) and TNF-qRT-PCR ( D ) . 
Colonization of spleen following infection with SL1344 was assessed by bacterial culture ( E ) . 
The means and SD in the histograms of C -- E are from two separate experiments involving at least two animals per group . 
The results of the MPO assay in the adult wild-type mice ( C ) are from the same group of animals as shown in Fig. 1D . 
Discussion
The experiments reported in this article reveal a novel role for IFN - in the immunological maturation of the gut . 
The mechanistic explanation for this role of IFN - is suggested by the identity of the IFN - - regulated genes that are up-regulated in the intestine in an age-dependent manner . 
IFN - - induced GTPases such as LRG-47 have been shown to inhibit intracellular multiplication of Salmonella and other pathogens ( 26 ) . 
Similarly , IDO has been shown to inhibit growth of several types of bacteria and certain parasites ( 28 ) . 
The net effect of increased expression of these mol-ecules would be to make cells of the intestinal mucosa more resistant to bacterial multiplication , an outcome that is consistent with our in vitro studies with IFN - - treated macrophages and intestinal epithelial cells ( Fig. 4 ) , as well as in the in vivo experiments with wild-type and IFN - - deﬁcient mice ( Figs. 1 and 5 ) . 
The age-dependent increase in expression of other IFN - - regu-lated genes , such as the polyimmunoglobulin receptor ( Table I ) and the chemokines CCL5 , CXCL9 , and CXCL10 ( Table I and Fig. 2 ) , is also likely to contribute to making the adult intestine more resistant to microbial entry and multiplication by promoting , respectively , the transepithelial transport of protective secretory Abs ( 27 ) and the recruitment of NK cells and macrophages to augment innate protection against infection ( 33 -- 35 ) . 
Finally , the age - and IFN - - dependent enhancement of intestinal TNF - expression in response to infection ( Figs. 1 and 5 ) results in greater recruitment of inﬂammatory cells such as neutrophils that are able to deal with bacterial invaders . 
Speciﬁcally relevant to our observations is the fact that IFN - has been shown to have a protective role in Salmonella infection and to enhance the expression of TNF - in response to LPS ( 36 , 37 ) . 
Our quantitative real-time PCR analyses indicate that both intestinal epithelial cells and lamina propria cells such as macro-phages are likely sites of expression of the IFN - - regulated genes because similar results were obtained regardless of whether RNA from puriﬁed epithelial cells or whole intestinal tissue was used . 
Indeed , immunohistochemical localization of IDO in the intestine indicates expression in both the epithelium and in subepithelial cells ( Fig. 2 ) . 
Chemokines such as CCL5 , CXCL9 , and CXCL10 have been shown to be expressed by intestinal epithelial cells , especially in response to infection ( 34 , 38 -- 40 ) . 
The cellular source of IFN - in the intestine is at present unclear . 
The results of quantitative real-time PCR indicate that it is likely to be in the nonepi-thelial compartment because an age-dependent increase in expression of the cytokine was observed only when RNA from whole intestinal tissue , rather than puriﬁed epithelial cells , was used . 
Candidate IFN - - producing cells include macrophages , NK cells , NKT cells , and T lymphocytes , and experiments to determine which of these cell types is the site of the developmentally regulated expression of IFN - in the intestine are ongoing . 
The results of our studies indicate an important role for the commensal ﬂora in the induction of IFN - - regulated genes in the intestine ( Fig. 3 ) , which is consistent with the age-dependent increase in number and complexity of these organisms and with their ability to induce alterations in gene expression and function in cells of the gut ( 26 , 27 , 38 -- 41 ) . 
The TLR family of cell surface proteins , which recognize microbial components such as LPS , ﬂagellin , and bacterial lipopeptide , constitute one set of candidate molecules that might be involved in sensing and responding to the commensal ﬂora ( 41 ) . 
Interestingly , the absence of a normal commensal ﬂora did not affect the age-dependent increase in intestinal 
IFN - expression ( Fig. 3 ) . 
It is possible that other factors associated with the weaning period , such as the introduction of solid food or the surge in circulating corticosteroids , might be involved in regulating expression of IFN - in the intestine ( 11 ) . 
Regardless , our results suggest that signals from the commensal ﬂora and IFN - act independently to inﬂuence the expression of CCL5 , CXCL9 , and IDO . 
It is possible that the two sets of signals cooperate at the level of transcription to up-regulate these genes , as has been reported in other systems ( 42 ) . 
It is important to note that factors other than the change in IFN -- regulated gene expression could contribute to the age-speciﬁc differences in immune response seen in our experiments . 
The GALT , including Peyer 's patches , the mesenteric lymph nodes , and the lymphocyte population of the lamina propria , are all underdeveloped in preweaned mice ( 43 ) . 
This immaturity of organized lymphoid structures could place constraints on the kind of local immune response that develops . 
In addition , although we were able to detect Salmonella in the mesenteric lymph nodes even in the preweaned mice ( data not shown ) , the lack of fully mature Peyer 's patches in these animals may favor the translocation of the organism by alternate routes , similar to what has been described for the uptake and extraintestinal dissemination of noninvasive bacteria by a population of CD18-positive phagocytes ( 44 ) . 
The greater number and complexity of the commensal ﬂora of the adult animals could also modify the response to Salmonella by amplifying local inﬂammation or by limiting colonization , and therefore spread , of the pathogen . 
The fact that the preweaned animals were still on breast milk is another factor that has to be considered . 
The presence of antimicrobial and immunomodulating factors in breast milk , such as secretory IgA , lactoferrin , IL-10 , TGF - , and IL-1R antagonist may act to alter the inﬂammatory response ( 45 ) . 
Finally , changes in intestinal expression of genes other than those that we have analyzed might play a role in the age-speciﬁc differences in immune response . 
For instance , our microarray data indicated that the expression of TLR3 was higher in the adult mice than in the pups ( 10.5-fold difference , p 0.02 ) . 
We have not pursued this observation further in the present series of experiments , but it is possible that alterations in TLR expression could contribute to differences in the inﬂammatory and antimicrobial responses between the adult and preweaned animals . 
Although our studies have focused on the response to Salmo-nella , the results are likely to be relevant to other infections . 
Neo-natal and weanling mice are more susceptible than adult animals to several intestinal pathogens , including Vibrio cholerae , enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli , Campylobacter jejuni , and Cryptospo-ridium parvum ( 46 -- 49 ) . 
In the case of Cryptosporidium infection , lack of IFN - has been shown to confer susceptibility to adult mice ( 50 ) . 
It would be worth examining whether developmental changes in the expression of IFN - - regulated genes in the intestine contribute to the age-speciﬁc differences in susceptibility to these infections . 
The ﬁndings reported here may also be relevant to more basic aspects of immune development in the GI tract . 
The chemokines CCL5 , CXCL9 , and CXCL10 are generally considered to be of the type 1 variety in that they preferentially attract Th1-type activated and memory T cells ( 25 ) . 
IFN - is well-known to promote the differentiation of Th1 cells ( 51 ) , and there is some evidence to suggest that certain chemokines , including CCL5 , can also promote Th1 differentiation , probably via indirect effects on APCs ( 52 ) . 
Thus , the age-dependent increase in expression of IFN - , CCL5 , CXCL9 , and CXCL10 in the intestine may contribute to the development of a local environment that favors Th1-type responses . 
This trend toward a Th1 bias is consistent with observations indicating a similar shift systemically , with neonatal mice tending to make a more Th2-dominated response to immunization than adults ( 53 , 54 ) . 
Interestingly , this age-dependent shift to Th1-dominated responses appears to be inﬂuenced by the commensal microﬂora ( 55 ) , much like our observations on the expression of IFN - - regulated genes in the intestine ( Fig. 3 ) . 
The presence of a Th1-promoting intestinal environment may be important in preventing the development of food allergies , which are characterized by inappropriately Th2-biased responses to food Ags . 
The age-dependent increase in IDO expression in the intestine is also likely to be relevant in this regard because it has been shown recently that induction of this enzyme in the lung suppresses the inﬂammation and airway hyperreactivity of asthma ( 56 ) , consistent with its role in suppressing lymphocyte responses ( 29 ) . 
Again , the importance of the intestinal commensal ﬂora in preventing allergic responses has been indicated by both epidemiologic and laboratory data ( 57 -- 59 ) . 
Indeed , it has been shown clearly that antibiotic-induced alteration of the gut commensal ﬂora can promote the development of a pulmonary allergic response to fungal spores ( 60 , 61 ) . 
It may be interesting to determine whether the reported beneﬁcial effects of probiotic bacteria in allergy ( 62 ) might be related to their ability to induce the expression of IFN - and its target genes in the intestine . 
It remains to be seen whether the expression of IFN - and its target genes increases in an age-dependent fashion in the human intestine . 
The overall sequence of development of the GALT is similar in mice and humans , and the period of weaning is associated with marked changes in this tissue in both species ( 11 , 43 ) . 
This was one reason for our choice of the preweaned mouse pup for our experiments , but it remains to be seen whether the responses of a 16 - to 18-day-old mouse correspond to those of a young human infant . 
If it can be shown that our observations in the mouse model can be extended to humans , inadequate levels of IFN - and IFN - - regulated genes could provide an explanation for the unusual susceptibility of young infants to extraintestinal spread of Salmonella and other bacteria ( 5 -- 7 ) . 
IFN - - based interventions could then be considered as a way of boosting intestinal resistance to infection in high-risk neonates and young babies and may also be one approach to preventing the development of food allergies . 
Acknowledgments
We thank Danny Park and Glenn Short for microarray analysis , Tricia Della Pelle and Atul Bhan for histopathologic analysis , Hai Ning Shi for assistance with FACS analysis , and Mohamed Bashir for assistance with animal studies . 
Disclosures 
The authors have no ﬁnancial conﬂict of interest.
References 
1 . 
Kosek , M. , C. Bern , and R. L. Guerrant . 
2003 . 
The global burden of diarrhoeal disease , as estimated from studies published between 1992 and 2000 . 
Bull . 
World Health Organ . 
81 : 197 -- 204 . 
2 . 
Black , R. E. , S. S. Morris , and J. Bryce . 
2003 . 
Where and why are 10 million children dying every year ? 
Lancet 361 : 22 -- 26 . 
3 . 
King , C. K. , R. Glass , J. S. Bresee , and C. Duggan . 
2003 . 
Managing acute gastroenteritis among children : oral rehydration , maintenance , and nutritional therapy . 
MMWR Recomm . 
Rep. 52 : 1 -- 16 . 
4 . 
2002 . 
Preliminary FoodNet data on the incidence of food-borne illnesses : selected sites , United States , 2001 . 
MMWR Morb . 
Mortal . 
Wkly . 
Rep. 51 : 325 -- 329 . 
5 . 
Brumell , J. H. , O. Steele-Mortimer , and B. B. Finlay . 
1999 Bacterial invasion : force feeding by Salmonella . 
Curr . 
Biol . 
9 : R277 -- R280 . 
6 . 
Wallis , T. S. , and E. E. Galyov . 
2000 . 
Molecular basis of Salmonella-induced enteritis . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
36 : 997 -- 1005 . 
7 . 
Kuppermann , N. 1999 . 
Occult bacteremia in young febrile children . 
Pediatr . 
Clin . 
North Am . 
46 : 1073 -- 1109 . 
8 . 
Schutze , G. E. , S. E. Schutze , and R. S. Kirby . 
1997 . 
Extraintestinal salmonellosis in a children 's hospital . 
Pediatr . 
Infect . 
Dis . 
J. 16 : 482 -- 485 . 
9 . 
Torrey , S. , G. Fleisher , and D. Jaffe . 
1986 . 
Incidence of Salmonella bacteremia in infants with Salmonella gastroenteritis . 
J. Pediatr . 
108 ( 5 Pt . 
1 ) : 718 -- 721 . 
10 . 
Kinney , J. S. , and J. J. Eiden . 
1994 . 
Enteric infectious disease in neonates : epidemiology , pathogenesis , and a practical approach to evaluation and therapy . 
Clin . 
Perinatol . 
21 : 317 -- 333 . 
11 . 
Cherayil , B. J. , and W. A. Walker . 
2003 . 
Ontogeny of the host response to enteric microbial infection . 
In Microbial Pathogens and the Intestinal Cell . 
G. Hecht , ed . 
ASM Press , Washington , DC , pp 333 -- 349 . 
12 . 
Barthel , M. , S. Hapfelmeier , L. Quintanilla-Martinez , M. Kremer , M. Rohde , M. Hogardt , K. Pfeffer , H. Russmann , and W. D. Hardt . 
2003 . 
Pretreatment of mice with streptomycin provides a Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium colitis model that allows analysis of both pathogen and host . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
71 : 2839 -- 2858 . 
13 . 
Savidge , T. C. , W. H. Pan , P. Newman , M. O'Brien , P. M. Anton , and C. Pothoulakis . 
2003 . 
Clostridium difﬁcile toxin B is an inﬂammatory enterotoxin in human intestine . 
Gastroenterology 125 : 413 -- 420 . 
14 . 
Li , Q. , and B. J. Cherayil . 
2004 . 
Toll-like receptor 4 mutation impairs the mac-rophage TNF - response to peptidoglycan . 
Biochem . 
Biophys . 
Res . 
Commun . 
325 : 91 -- 96 . 
15 . 
Huang , F. C. , A. Werne , Q. Li , E. E. Galyov , W. A. Walker , and B. J. Cherayil . 
2004 . 
Cooperative interactions between ﬂagellin and SopE2 in the epithelial in-terleukin-8 response to Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium infection . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
72 : 5052 -- 5062 . 
16 . 
Evans , G. S. , N. Flint , A. S. Somers , B. Eyden , and C. S. Potten . 
1992 . 
The development of a method for the preparation of rat intestinal epithelial cell primary cultures . 
J. Cell Sci . 
101 ( Pt . 
1 ) : 219 -- 231 . 
17 . 
Mizoguchi , E. , R. J. Xavier , H. C. Reinecker , H. Uchino , A. K. Bhan , D. K. Podolsky , and A. Mizoguchi . 
2003 . 
Colonic epithelial functional phenotype varies with type and phase of experimental colitis . 
Gastroenterology 125 : 148 -- 161 . 
18 . 
Saal , L. H. , C. Troein , J. Vallon-Christersson , S. Gruvberger , A. Borg , and C. Peterson . 
2002 . 
BioArray Software Environment ( BASE ) : a platform for comprehensive management and analysis of microarray data . 
Genome Biol . 
3 : SOFTWARE0003 . 
19 . 
Dahlquist , K. D. , N. Salomonis , K. Vranizan , S. C. Lawlor , and B. R. Conklin . 
2002 . 
GenMAPP , a new tool for viewing and analyzing microarray data on biological pathways . 
Nat . 
Genet . 
31 : 19 -- 20 . 
20 . 
Doniger , S. W. , N. Salomonis , K. D. Dahlquist , K. Vranizan , S. C. Lawlor , and B. R. Conklin . 
2003 . 
MAPPFinder : using Gene Ontology and GenMAPP to create a global gene-expression proﬁle from microarray data . 
Genome Biol . 
4 : R7 . 
21 . 
McCormick , B. A. , S. I. Miller , D. Carnes , and J. L. Madara . 
1995 . 
Transepi-thelial signaling to neutrophils by salmonellae : a novel virulence mechanism for gastroenteritis . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
63 : 2302 -- 2309 . 
22 . 
Gewirtz , A. T. , A. M. Siber , J. L. Madara , and B. A. McCormick . 
1999 . 
Orchestration of neutrophil movement by intestinal epithelial cells in response to Sal-monella typhimurium can be uncoupled from bacterial internalization . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
67 : 608 -- 617 . 
23 . 
Yang , K. K. , B. G. Dorner , U. Merkel , B. Ryffel , C. Schutt , D. Golenbock , M. W. Freeman , and R. S. Jack . 
2002 . 
Neutrophil inﬂux in response to a peritoneal infection with Salmonella is delayed in lipopolysaccharide-binding protein or CD14-deﬁcient mice . 
J. Immunol . 
169 : 4475 -- 4480 . 
24 . 
Everest , P. , M. Roberts , and G. Dougan . 
1998 . 
Susceptibility to Salmonella typhimurium infection and effectiveness of vaccination in mice deﬁcient in the tumor necrosis factor p55 receptor . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
66 : 3355 -- 3364 . 
25 . 
Rot , A. , and U. H. von Andrian . 
2004 . 
Chemokines in innate and adaptive host defense : basic chemokinese grammar for immune cells . 
Annu . 
Rev. Immunol . 
22 : 891 -- 928 . 
26 . 
Taylor , G. A. , C. G. Feng , and A. Sher . 
2004 . 
p47 GTPases : regulators of immunity to intracellular pathogens . 
Nat . 
Rev. Immunol . 
4 : 100 -- 109 . 
27 . 
Phalipon , A. , and B. Corthesy . 
2003 . 
Novel functions of the polymeric Ig receptor : well beyond transport of immunoglobulins . 
Trends Immunol . 
24 : 55 -- 58 . 
28 . 
Daubener , W. , and C. R. MacKenzie . 
1999 . 
IFN - activated indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase activity in human cells is an antiparasitic and an antibacterial effector mechanism . 
Adv. Exp . 
Med . 
Biol . 
467 : 517 -- 524 . 
29 . 
Mellor , A. L. , and D. H. Munn . 
2004 . 
IDO expression by dendritic cells : tolerance and tryptophan catabolism . 
Nat . 
Rev. Immunol . 
4 : 762 -- 774 . 
30 . 
Rawls , J. F. , B. S. Samuel , and J. I. Gordon . 
2004 . 
Gnotobiotic zebraﬁsh reveal evolutionarily conserved responses to the gut microbiota . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 101 : 4596 -- 4601 . 
31 . 
Hooper , L. V. , P. G. Falk , and J. I. Gordon . 
2000 . 
Analyzing the molecular foundations of commensalism in the mouse intestine . 
Curr . 
Opin . 
Microbiol . 
3 : 79 -- 85 . 
32 . 
Vidal , K. , I. Grosjean , J. P. Evillard , C. Gespach , and D. Kaiserlian . 
1993 . 
Immortalization of mouse intestinal epithelial cells by the SV40-large T gene : phenotypic and immune characterization of the MODE-K cell line . 
J. Immunol . 
Methods 166 : 63 -- 73 . 
33 . 
Boring , L. , J. Gosling , S. W. Chensue , S. L. Kunkel , R. V. Farese , Jr. , H. E. Broxmeyer , and I. F. Charo . 
1997 . 
Impaired monocyte migration and reduced type 1 ( Th1 ) cytokine responses in C-C chemokine receptor 2 knockout mice . 
J. Clin . 
Invest . 
100 : 2552 -- 2561 . 
34 . 
Dwinell , M. B. , N. Lugering , L. Eckmann , and M. F. Kagnoff . 
2001 . 
Regulated production of interferon-inducible T cell chemoattractants by human intestinal epithelial cells . 
Gastroenterology 120 : 49 -- 59 . 
35 . 
Martin-Fontecha , A. , L. L. Thomsen , S. Brett , C. Gerard , M. Lipp , A. Lanzavecchia , and F. Sallusto . 
2004 . 
Induced recruitment of NK cells to lymph nodes provides IFN - for TH1 priming . 
Nat . 
Immunol . 
5 : 1260 -- 1265 . 
36 . 
Heinzel , F. P. 1990 . 
The role of IFN - in the pathology of experimental endotoxemia . 
J. Immunol . 
145 : 2920 -- 2924 . 
37 . 
Wick , M. J. 2004 . 
Living in the danger zone : innate immunity to Salmonella . 
Curr . 
Opin . 
Microbiol . 
7 : 51 -- 57 . 
38 . 
Casola , A. , M. K. Estes , S. E. Crawford , P. L. Ogra , P. B. Ernst , R. P. Garofalo , and S. E. Crowe . 
1998 . 
Rotavirus infection of cultured intestinal epithelial cells induces secretion of CXC and CC chemokines . 
Gastroenterology 114 : 947 -- 955 . 
39 . 
Shibahara , T. , J. N. Wilcox , T. Couse , and J. L. Madara . 
2001 . 
Characterization of epithelial chemoattractants for human intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes . 
Gastroenterology 120 : 60 -- 70 . 
40 . 
Lacroix-Lamande , S. , R. Mancassola , M. Naciri , and F. Laurent . 
2002 . 
Role of interferon in chemokine expression in the ileum of mice and in a murine intestinal epithelial cell line after Cryptosporidium parvum infection . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
70 : 2090 -- 2099 . 
41 . 
Kopp , E. , and R. Medzhitov . 
2003 . 
Recognition of microbial infection by Tolllike receptors . 
Curr . 
Opin . 
Immunol . 
15 : 396 -- 401 . 
42 . 
Xie , Q. , and C. Nathan . 
1994 . 
The high-output nitric oxide pathway : role and regulation . 
J. Leukocyte Biol . 
56 : 576 -- 582 . 
43 . 
Finke , D. , and J. P. Kraehenbuhl . 
2001 . 
Formation of Peyer 's patches . 
Curr . 
Opin . 
Genet . 
Dev . 
11 : 561 -- 567 . 
44 . 
Vazquez-Torres , A. , J. Jones-Carson , A. J. Baumler , S. Falkow , R. Valdivia , W. Brown , M. Le , R. Berggren , W. T. Parks , and F. C. Fang . 
1999 . 
Extraintes-tinal dissemination of Salmonella by CD18-expressing phagocytes . 
Nature 401 : 804 -- 808 . 
45 . 
Claud , E. C. , and W. A. Walker . 
2001 . 
Hypothesis : inappropriate colonization of the premature intestine can cause neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis . 
FASEB J. 15 : 1398 -- 1403 . 
46 . 
Field , L. H. , J. L. Underwood , L. M. Pope , and L. J. Berry . 
1981 . 
Intestinal colonization of neonatal animals by Campylobacter fetus subsp . 
jejuni . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
33 : 884 -- 892 . 
47 . 
Taylor , R. K. , V. L. Miller , D. B. Furlong , and J. J. Mekalanos . 
1987 . 
Use of phoA gene fusions to identify a pilus colonization factor coordinately regulated with cholera toxin . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 84 : 2833 -- 2837 . 
48 . 
Newsome , P. M. , M. N. Burgess , M. R. Burgess , K. A. Coney , M. E. Goddard , and J. A. Morris . 
1987 . 
A model of acute infectious neonatal diarrhoea . 
J. Med . 
Microbiol . 
23 : 19 -- 28 . 
49 . 
Novak , S. M. , and C. R. Sterling . 
1991 . 
Susceptibility dynamics in neonatal BALB/c mice infected with Cryptosporidium parvum . 
J. Protozool . 
38 : 103S -- 104S . 
50 . 
Ungar , B. L. , T. C. Kao , J. A. Burris , and F. D. Finkelman . 
1991 . 
Cryptospo-ridium infection in an adult mouse model : independent roles for IFN - and CD4 T lymphocytes in protective immunity . 
J. Immunol . 
147 : 1014 -- 1022 . 
51 . 
O'Garra , A. , and D. Robinson . 
2004 . 
Development and function of T helper 1 cells . 
Adv. Immunol . 
83 : 133 -- 162 . 
52 . 
Luther , S. A. , and J. G. Cyster . 
2001 . 
Chemokines as regulators of T cell differentiation . 
Nat . 
Immunol . 
2 : 102 -- 107 . 
53 . 
Barrios , C. , P. Brawand , M. Berney , C. Brandt , P. H. Lambert , and C. A. Siegrist . 
1996 . 
Neonatal and early life immune responses to various forms of vaccine antigens qualitatively differ from adult responses : predominance of a Th2-biased pattern which persists after adult boosting . 
Eur . 
J. Immunol . 
26 : 1489 -- 1496 . 
54 . 
Adkins , B. 1999 . 
T cell function in newborn mice and humans . 
Immunol . 
Today 20 : 330 -- 335 . 
55 . 
Oyama , N. , N. Sudo , H. Sogawa , and C. Kubo . 
2001 . 
Antibiotic use during infancy promotes a shift in the TH1/TH2 balance toward TH2-dominant immunity in mice . 
J. Allergy Clin . 
Immunol . 
107 : 153 -- 159 . 
56 . 
Hayashi , T. , L. Beck , C. Rossetto , X. Gong , O. Takikawa , K. Takabayashi , D. H. Broide , D. A. Carson , and E. Raz . 
2004 . 
Inhibition of experimental asthma by indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase . 
J. Clin . 
Invest . 
114 : 270 -- 279 . 
57 . 
Wickens , K. , N. Pearce , J. Crane , and R. Beasley . 
1999 . 
Antibiotic use in early childhood and the development of asthma . 
Clin . 
Exp . 
Allergy 29 : 766 -- 771 . 
58 . 
Wills-Karp , M. , J. Santeliz , and C. L. Karp . 
2001 . 
The germless theory of allergic disease : revisiting the hygiene hypothesis . 
Nat . 
Rev. Immunol . 
1 : 69 -- 75 . 
59 . 
Bashir , M. E. , S. Louie , H. N. Shi , and C. Nagler-Anderson . 
2004 . 
Toll-like receptor 4 signaling by intestinal microbes inﬂuences susceptibility to food allergy . 
J. Immunol . 
172 : 6978 -- 6987 . 
60 . 
Noverr , M. C. , R. M. Noggle , G. B. Toews , and G. B. Huffnagle . 
2004 . 
Role of antibiotics and fungal microbiota in driving pulmonary allergic responses . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
72 : 4996 -- 5003 . 
61 . 
Noverr , M. C. , N. R. Falkowski , R. A. McDonald , A. N. McKenzie , and G. B. Huffnagle . 
2005 . 
Development of allergic airway disease in mice following antibiotic therapy and fungal microbiota increase : role of host genetics , antigen , and interleukin-13 . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
73 : 30 -- 38 . 
62 . 
Kalliomaki , M. A. , and E. Isolauri . 
2004 . 
Probiotics and down-regulation of the allergic response . 
Immunol . 
Allergy Clin . 
North Am . 
24 : 739 -- 752 .