FEMS Microbiology Reviews 29 ( 2005 ) 1021 -- 1040 
www.fems-microbiology.org 
Salmonella stress management and its relevance behaviour during intestinal colonisation and infection
to 
a , * , Paul A. Barrow b 
Ivan Rychlik 
a 
Veterinary Research Institute , Hudcova 70 , 621 32 Brno , Czech Republic b Institute for Animal Health , Compton , Newbury , Oxfordshire , RG20 7NN , UK 
Received 7 December 2004 ; received in revised form 4 March 2005 ; accepted 30 March 2005 
First published online 29 June 2005 
Abstract 
The enteric pathogen Salmonella enterica is exposed to a number of stressful environments during its life cycle within and outside its various hosts . 
During intestinal colonisation Salmonella is successively exposed to acid pH in the stomach , to the detergent-like activity of bile , to decreasing oxygen supply , to the presence of multiple metabolites produced by the normal gut microﬂora and ﬁnally it is exposed to cationic antimicrobial peptides present on the surface of epithelial cells . 
There are four major regulators controlling relevant stress responses in Salmonella , namely RpoS , PhoPQ , Fur and OmpR/EnvZ . 
Except for Fur , inactivation of genes encoding the other stress regulators results in attenuated virulence and such mutants can therefore be considered as vaccine candidates . 
In contrast , a decrease in oxygen supply monitored by Fnr and ArcAB , or oxidative stress controlled by OxyR and SoxRS is not regarded as a stress associated with host colonisation since inactivation of either of these systems does not result in reductions in colonisation . 
The role of quorum-sensing through luxS and sdiA is also considered as a regulator of virulence and colonisation . 
2005 Federation of European Microbiological Societies . 
Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved . 
Keywords : Salmonella ; Acid resistance ; Bile ; Cationic antimicrobial peptide ; Heat shock ; Virulence ; Quorum sensing ; Short chain fatty acid 
Contents 
Introduction ... . 
Stresses encountered by Salmonella on entering the host -- resistance to low pH ... 2.1 . 
RpoS and the acid stress response ... 2.2 . 
Fur and the acid stress response ... 2.3 . 
PhoPQ and the acid stress response ... 2.4 . 
OmpR/EnvZ and the acid stress response ... . 
Salmonella inside the gut ... 3.1 . 
Heat and outer membrane shock ... 3.2 . 
Osmotic shock ... 3.3 . 
Response to bile ... 
. . 
1 2 
1022 1022 1023 1024 1024 1025 1026 1026 1026 1027 
. 
3 
3.4 . 
Switch from aerobiosis to microaerobiosis and anaerobiosis inside the gut ... 1027 
* 
Corresponding author. Tel.: +420 533331201/541321241; fax: +420 541211229/542211229. E-mail address: rychlik@vri.cz (I. Rychlik).
0168-6445 / $ 22.00 2005 Federation of European Microbiological Societies . 
Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved . 
doi :10.1016 / j.femsre .2005.03.005 
1. Introduction
An enteric bacterial pathogen such as Salmonella is exposed to a number of stressful environments during its life cycle and the ways in which it responds to different and multiple stresses are correspondingly complex . 
Stress occurs when the bacterial cell experiences sudden changes in its environment . 
Under laboratory conditions Salmonella may experience stress naturally when nutrients or electron acceptors become limited and Sal-monella enters the stationary phase of growth . 
Outside the laboratory , in the organism s real life , this may happen whenever Salmonella enters a host from the environment but also when Salmonella leaves the host into the environment . 
Genes and proteins identiﬁed as being central to the mechanism employed by the bacterium to cope with stress , particularly those involved in ﬁrst contact with the host , may act as potential targets for immune intervention . 
The major stress factors and the genes and proteins required for control of stress management by Salmonella are the subject of this review . 
Naturally , different serotypes ( or even different strains within a given serotype ) may respond differently to various stresses . 
Therefore , if not speciﬁcally stated , information given in this review was obtained by experiments with the two most frequent serovars Typhimurium and Enteritidis and may not necessarily be representative of other serotypes . 
2 . 
Stresses encountered by Salmonella on entering the host -- resistance to low pH 
When Salmonella enters a host , it ﬁrst senses an increase in temperature followed by a dramatic change in pH. In the stomach , the pH suddenly drops to values which may approach 1 -- 2 , although locally the pH can be higher as a result of the buffering capacity of feed . 
From the point of view of acid stress adaptation , animal hosts may be divided into those with simple or more complex stomach systems , exempliﬁed for the purposes of this review by mice , pigs and humans , and on the other hand gallinaceous birds . 
In non-ruminant mammals , Salmonella and other bacteria pass immediately to the stomach on ingestion . 
In gallinaceous birds including the chicken , Salmonella ﬁrst reaches the crop where the pH is between 4 and 5 , as a result of bacterial lactic acid fermentation , a pH which enables Salmonella to adapt to much higher DH + and thereby resist the anti-bacterial effects of the stomach . 
Salmonella is relatively resistant to low pH when in the stationary phase of growth [ 1 ] . 
When growing exponentially , however , it is less acid resistant and can survive exposure only to moderately low pH values of between 4 and 5 . 
However , in both the cases , Salmonella can become more acid resistant after a short period of adaptation at moderate pH. This phenomenon is called the acid tolerance response ( ATR ) [ 1 -- 4 ] . 
When this occurs in exponentially growing cells , there are two distinct steps to adaptation . 
Transient adaptation is achieved after 20 min exposure to moderate pH with a second le-vel of sustained adaptation requiring 60 min of exposure . 
The proteins and genes induced by Salmonella in response to low pH can be identiﬁed by a number of techniques , including the generation of random promoter fusions and selection of the promoters of genes induced speciﬁcally under low pH. This approach has allowed the identiﬁcation of genes coding for proteins related to cell -- surface structure and maintenance ( aas , pbpA and cld ) , stress response ( dps and rna ) and generalised eﬄux pump mar and emr [ 5 ] . 
However , although individual effector proteins are important for acid survival , regulatory proteins are equally important . 
Salmonella harbours several regulons which enable it to adapt to acidiﬁcation , especially those controlled by RpoS , Fur , PhoPQ , and OmpR/EnvZ . 
Two of them , PhoPQ and OmpR/envZ , are two-component signal transduction systems while the other two genes/proteins operate apparently individually in the bacterial cytoplasm . 
rpoS and fur are essential for response to low pH induced by organic acids in log phase while the phoPQ system is tuned to response to inorganic low pH stress [ 6 ] . 
ompR/envZ is necessary for acid resistance in stationary phase cells [ 7,8 ] . 
An additional gene , oxrG is also involved in regulation of the low pH response although almost nothing is known about its function [ 9 ] 
3 3 
.5 .6 o c e 
. 
Interaction with gut microflora ... . 
Cationic antimicrobial peptides ... . 
ncluding remarks ... . 
knowledgements ... . 
ferences ... 
1028 1031 1032 1034 1034 
C A R 
. 
4 
RpoS is one of the sigma subunits of RNA polymer-ase . 
It was ﬁrst described in Escherichia coli and subsequently in Salmonella where , in addition to its association with the starvation stress response and virulence it was found to be associated with acid response [ 10 ] . 
RpoS binds the core RNA polymerase primarily under stress conditions and controls the expression of a speciﬁc subset of genes which increases resistance to a variety of stresses . 
In vitro RpoS is expressed in stationary phase during nutrient limitations [ 11 ] or in a low pH environment [ 12 -- 14 ] . 
RpoS is known to be expressed also in vivo in the eucaryotic intracellular environment [ 13 ] . 
Genes known to belong to the RpoS regulon in Salmonella include spv [ 15 -- 17 ] , ots [ 18 ] , katE [ 13 ] , poxB and ogt [ 19 ] , or narZYWV [ 20 ] . 
There are also more than 10 other open reading frames ( ORFs ) of unknown function regulated by RpoS in stationary phase of growth [ 19 ] and 7 other loci regulated after exposure to low pH [ 14 ] . 
As a consequence , rpoS mutants are defective of prolonged survival in nutrient-depleted media or survival in low pH environment . 
Genes regulated by RpoS in E. coli are better described [ 21 ] and it can be expected that majority of genes regulated by RpoS in E. coli will be regulated in the same manner in Salmonella . 
The rpoS regulon in Salmonella in stationary phase is responsible for stress tolerance including resistance to pH. RpoS is also involved in the log phase Salmonella acid tolerance response . 
To observe the log phase rpoS-dependent acid resistance , the adaptation period must last for at least 60 min . 
During such a period of adaptation ( upto 120 min ) , a subset of about 50 proteins is induced [ 22 ] , seven of which are RpoS-dependent [ 14 ] . 
Shorter moderate acid adaptation also increases total acid resistance of Salmonella but this process is rpoS-independent and requires functional Fur protein ( see below ) . 
During the adaptation period , the intracellular level of RpoS increases . 
Because RpoS competes for the core RNA polymerase with the other sigma subunits [ 23 ] , when more RpoS is available in the cytoplasm , more RNA polymerase interacts with it resulting in greater induction of the RpoS regulon . 
Consistent with the central role of rpoS in the stress response in Salmonella is its complex regulation . 
Total rpoS expression is controlled at all levels starting from transcription [ 24 -- 26 ] , regulation of mRNA stability , translational eficiency , and regulation of RpoS proteolysis . 
Stability and eficiency of translation of rpoS mRNA is controlled by small regulatory RNAs such as DsrA or RprA [ 27 -- 29 ] . 
Interestingly , the DsrA RNA in conjunction with Hfq can positively regulate RpoS translation but suppress H-NS expression by stabilisation of rpoS mRNA but increasing turnover of hns mRNA [ 27 ] . 
In log phase acid-shocked Salmonella , the level of RpoS can increase by increased translation through a mechanism independent of DsrA and RprA . 
The 566 nt untranslated 50 end region ( UTR ) of the rpoS mRNA controls acid shock-induced translation . 
Except for the initial 51 nucleotides of the mRNA , the remaining part of the untranslated region is essential for acid induced increases in translation , probably due to the formation of competing stem loop structures of UTR of rpoS mRNA in response to acid shock [ 30 ] . 
Thus , on passage through the stomach transcription of the whole set of rpoS-regulated genes is likely to be initiated , with associated increases in resistance to a number of other stresses . 
The pH of the small intestine is between 6 and 7 , due to the presence of organic acids including short chain fatty acids ( SCFA ) produced by the normal microﬂora , mainly lactic acid bacteria and buffered by bicarbonate ions . 
These acids can be toxic to Salmonella ; however , acid tolerance , induced in the stomach , also protects Salmonella against their action [ 31 ] . 
As a corollary , contact with increased concentrations of SCFA also results into increased acid resistance in Salmonella [ 32 ] which may , thus , maintain a degree of acid resistance prior to entry of Salmonella into host cells and the phagolysosome where pH values are around 5 . 
Interestingly , SCFA also induce expression of the spv genes [ 33 ] , known to be necessary for Salmonella intracellular survival . 
Salmonella can therefore utilise changes in pH to monitor the environment and modulate the infection process . 
RpoS levels can also increase by decreased protein degradation . 
This is dependent on the ClpXP protease complex and MviA ( RssB ) [ 12,34,35 ] . 
RssB is a response regulator in which the phosphorylated form exhibits a high afinity for RpoS and makes it available to proteo-lytic degradation by ClpXP [ 36 ] . 
Mutants with inactivated mviA ( rssB ) or clpP thus accumulate higher levels of RpoS even in non-stressed cells and are generally more acid resistant [ 12 ] . 
rpoS null mutants are attenuated for mice both after per oral and intraperitoneal routes of infection [ 37 ] . 
Nickerson and Curtiss found that RpoS-regulated genes are essential for colonisation of gut-associated lymphoid tissue despite the fact that the rpoS mutant colonised the gut as eficiently as did the wild-type strain [ 38 ] . 
This would indicate that rpoS mutants are attenuated mainly due to the regulation of spv genes during the systemic phase of disease and not due to decreased acid resistance during passage through stomach . 
Consistent with this are observations showing that ClpP or MviA mutants , with increased RpoS levels and increased acid resistance , are also of attenuated virulence for mice [ 12,39 ] . 
In chickens the situation seems to be different from mice . 
We did not ﬁnd a difference in virulence of the wild-type strain and rpoS mutants of S. typhimurium and S. ente-ritidis for chickens after oral infection [ 40 ] . 
Another experiment showed that of three wild-type strains wit a naturally defective rpoS gene , only two were attenuated for chickens while one of them was fully virulent [ 41 ] . 
Whether acid pre-adaptation of Salmonella in the crop of birds , which is missing in mammals , plays any role in these apparently contradictory results in mice and chicken remains unclear . 
2.1 . 
RpoS and the acid stress response 
2.2. Fur and the acid stress response
The Fur protein is usually linked to the regulation of bacterial iron metabolism . 
Upon complexing with Fe , 2 + Fur recognises a speciﬁc DNA sequence , the fur box and binds to it . 
The consensus fur box is 19 bp long GAT-AATGATAATCATTATC sequence and it is most frequently found between the 35 and 10 sequences of sigma 70 promoters . 
When Fe -- Fur is bound to the 2 + fur box , gene transcription is prevented . 
If iron becomes limiting , Fe dissociates from the complex making Fur 2 + unable to bind and thus allowing the transcription of normally repressed genes . 
Because the Fur regulon includes genes for iron uptake and transport , such regulation results in increased expression of genes for the eficient iron uptake only when iron is a growth-limiting factor [ 42 ] . 
Despite the fact that Fur is primarily a negative regulator , it can also act as a positive regulator since at least nine proteins require the presence of both Fur and iron for their expression and six proteins require a functional Fur free of iron for their expression [ 43 ] . 
However , in such cases it is not clear whether Fur directly regulates such genes or whether this may be caused by the indirect action of Fur as a negative regulator of a second negative regulator . 
Surprisingly , it was found that fur mutants show reduced adaptation to acidiﬁcation [ 2,43 ] . 
Proteins regulated by Fur in response to iron starvation or low pH form two distinct clusters with the exception of seven proteins which are inﬂuenced by both these factors . 
Like RpoS , Fur is also involved in the acid tolerance response of log phase cells [ 14,43 ] , and predominantly responds to organic acid stress [ 6 ] . 
Unlike RpoS , Fur is essential for rapid but transient induction of a set of proteins at pH 5 which allows Salmonella to survive subsequent challenge at pH 3 . 
This set of proteins is induced 20 -- 40 min post-exposure to pH 5 but it disappears after 60 min exposure , during which time RpoS-controlled systems of ATR are induced [ 14,22 ] . 
Why Fur integrates the iron and pH responses is not known . 
A possible explanation for this observation is that in the acid environment , Fe is more easily avail-3 + able and consequently , intracellular iron concentration increases . 
However , experimental increases or decreases of iron at neutral pH did not result in increased acid resistance in either Salmonella or Helicobacter pylori [ 44,45 ] , and pH-regulated genes do not respond to iron availability [ 9 ] . 
Finally , Hall and Foster showed that the iron and acid regulation of Fur can be separated genetically . 
Mutation H90R of the Fur protein sequence resulted in the mutant showing a deregulated iron response but still being capable of an acid tolerance response . 
Histidine 90 of the Fur primary structure is therefore indispensable for iron-dependent regulation but is not necessary for pH-dependent regulation [ 45 ] . 
None of this , however , explains why evolution selected for Fur sensing both iron concentration and pH. Although iron is the ﬁfth most important ion for the living cell , its excess can be toxic . 
The primary reason for this is Fenton s reaction during which Fe is responsible 2 + for generation of toxic hydroxyl radicals from hydrogen peroxide which can damage cellular structures [ 46 ] . 
Because exposure to low pH also leads to oxidative stress , it is thus possible that the unifying action of Fur lies in its protection against oxidative damage . 
This may be supported by observations in E. coli where levels of fes or ydiE mRNA , genes controlled by Fe -- Fur , were found to be the same in fur mutants as in the wild-type strain when treated with H2O2 [ 47 ] . 
If oxidative stress is caused by excess of iron , this could lead to the cell attempting to limit iron uptake . 
Recently , Fur has been associated also with the response and resistance to nitrosative stress [ 47,48 ] . 
Furthermore , a number of Fur protein molecules per bacterial cell ( 5000 -- 10,000 ) is much more than that of typical transcriptional regulators [ 49 ] . 
It is therefore possible that the function of Fur is slightly different from more usually understood regulatory proteins . 
Little is known about identity of acid-induced Fur-regulated genes [ 9 ] . 
As a result of this , it would be interesting to compare the promoter sequences of known Fur-regu-lated genes responsive to iron restriction , acid pH and nitrosative stress and analyse the presence or absence of fur boxes in them . 
And the most surprisingly , despite the in vitro results showing clearly a role for Fur in different stress responses , a fur mutant of S. typhimurium SL1344 was only weakly attenuated both after per oral and intra-peritoneal application [ 50 ] . 
Although question remains to what extent S. typhimurium SL1344 is suitable for creating fur deletions since the SL1344 clone available in our laboratory , at least , is of quite an unu-sual morphology ( Fig. 1 ) and since fur mutants are known to form ﬁlamentous cells [ 46 ] , it can not be excluded that SL1344 is naturally fur deﬁcient or fur misregulated . 
2.3. PhoPQ and the acid stress response
phoPQ is a two-component signal transduction system present not only in Salmonella [ 51 ] but also in E. coli , Shigella and Yersinia [ 52 ] . 
PhoQ is a mem-brane-bound sensor protein and PhoP is the transcriptional regulator . 
PhoQ senses Mg and Ca 2 + 2 + concentration and when these decrease to micromolar levels , it phosphorylates PhoP [ 53,54 ] . 
The PhoPQ regulon consists of 40 proteins , most of which ar positively regulated . 
PhoP-suppressed genes include prgH and ﬂiC [ 55 -- 57 ] , PhoP-activated genes include pmrAB , another two-component signal transduction system involved primarily in the protection of Salmo-nella to cationic antimicrobial peptides ( CAMP , see below ) [ 58 ] , mgtA and mgtCB encoding Mg transport 2 + systems , phoN , a periplasmic non-speciﬁc acid phospha-tase , pcgL encoding a periplasmic D-Ala -- D-Ala dipeptidase , or pagL , pagP and pgtE which contribute to increased resistance to CAMPs [ 59 -- 62 ] . 
The phoPQ regulon is essential for Salmonella intracellular survival where it increases resistance to antimicrobial peptides [ 63 ] , suppresses SPI-1 encoded genes necessary for Salmonella entry to non-professional phagocytic cells [ 56,57 ] and contributes to the expression of SPI-2 genes [ 64 ] although the SPI-2 regulation is confusing and at least some of the SPI-2 genes can be expressed independently of PhoPQ [ 65 ] . 
Although the main signal which controls expression of the phoPQ regulon is low Mg concentration [ 62 ] , 2 + moderate pH and low ionic strength are also known to inﬂuence expression of this regulon [ 66 ] . 
phoP was among the ﬁrst genes shown to be involved in the acid tolerance response as a mutation in phoP eliminated adaption to low pH [ 3 ] . 
Later it was shown that the main role of the phoPQ-dependent acid tolerance response is Salmonella protection to inorganic acid stress [ 6 ] . 
This is consistent with PhoPQ activation within the Salmonella-containing vacuole , the environment of which is expected to be of relatively low complexity and in which acid stress can be caused by an increase in H concentration . 
+ 
2.4. OmpR/EnvZ and the acid stress response
The OmpR/EnvZ signal transduction system is usually associated with osmolarity-dependent regulation of the OmpC and OmpF porins . 
Under low osmolarity , OmpF is preferentially synthesised and under high osmolarity OmpC is one of the major outer membrane proteins [ 67 ] . 
The changes in osmolarity are sensed by EnvZ . 
In the presence of a signal , EnvZ autophosphorylates at histidine 243 and transfer the phosphate to aspartate 55 of OmpR [ 68 ] . 
Phosphorylated OmpR binds to DNA and activates transcription of target genes . 
ompC was found to be induced also upon Salmo-nella shift to low pH and such induction was dependent on OmpR [ 9 ] . 
This effect is also common to E. coli [ 69 ] . 
Interestingly , EnvZ was not absolutely necessary for OmpR-dependent acid induction of ompC and ompF [ 69 ] suggesting that unlike osmolarity , the EnvZ sensor is not required for full expression of the pH-dependent OmpR regulon . 
In Salmonella , ompR has been shown to be induced by low pH and the induction could be observed at the mRNA as well as the protein level [ 8 ] . 
ompR can be transcribed from two promoters , one being used primarily at neutral pH and the other at low pH [ 7 ] . 
Our results with a ompR-luxCDABE promoter fusion also show that in S. typhimurium expression of OmpR responds to increases in osmolarity only to a small extent while it is induced more than tenfold in response to acidiﬁcation ( Rychlik and Gregorova , unpublished ) . 
At moderate pH values of around 5.8 , phosphorylation of OmpR is dependent on EnvZ whereas at lower values down to pH 4 , phosphorylation becomes dependent mainly on acetyl phosphate [ 8 ] . 
Besides regulation of target genes , the phosphorylated OmpR also binds to its own promoter and thus further stimulates its own transcription [ 7 ] . 
Unlike RpoS and Fur which are important to the adaptation of log phase Salmonella cells to changes in external pH , OmpR is central to stationary phase-inducible acid tolerance [ 1 ] . 
ompR mutants are capable of adapting to low pH in log phase growth but are unable to improve their low pH ﬁtness in stationary phase [ 8,70 ] . 
Interestingly , OmpR/EnvZ also regulates both SPI1 and SPI2 encoded genes . 
SPI1 genes are regulated through the regulator HilA [ 71 ] and SPI2 genes are regulated through the SsrAB regulators [ 72,73 ] . 
Acid shock in the stomach can be translated through OmpR into the induction of SPI1 genes essential for the invasion of epi-thelial cells . 
pH values approaching 5 inside the Salmo-nella containing vacuole can be translated by OmpR into SPI2 induction . 
Organic acid acidiﬁcation shoul lead primarily to OmpR activation of hilA while inorganic acid stress should lead to ssrAB activation inside the eucaryotic cell in the nutrient-deprived environment . 
Thus OmpR/EnvZ , in addition to PhoPQ , seem to convert pH decreases into the regulation of different virulence factors while the primary role of rpoS and fur appears to be protection against acid stress itself ( Table 1 ) . 
Fig. 1 . 
Phosphotungstic acid stained 24 h old cultures of S. typhimurium . 
Left panel : typical shape of S. typhimurium LT2 cell . 
Right panel : elongated cell of S. typhimurium SL1344 . 
Figures kindly provided by P. Kulich , VRI Brno , Czech Republic . 
3. Salmonella inside the gut
When Salmonella leaves the stomach it becomes exposed to several new stresses to which it must respond to survive . 
It is exposed to multiple external stress factors , including increase in osmotic pressure , which alters folding of proteins present in the outer membrane and periplasm . 
Outer and cytoplasmic membranes are subjected to the action of bile secreted by the gall bladder into the duodenum . 
In addition oxygen concentration gradually decreases and enteric pathogens induce anaerobic respiration [ 74,75 ] . 
Inside the small and large intestine , Salmonella has to cope increasingly with the presence of other microorganisms , components of the normal microﬂora . 
The microﬂora is able to passively restrict Salmonella growth by creating a nutrientdepleted environment , by releasing by-products of their metabolic activities such as propionate or butyrate , which can be harmful to Salmonella , or by production of bacteriocins . 
Salmonella is also able to sense the presence of other bacterial species via quorum sensing communication pathways . 
3.1 . 
Heat and outer membrane shock 
Since the optimal growth temperature for Salmonella is 37 C , the mammalian body temperature probably does not induce the expression of stress regulatory pathways . 
This may , however , be the case when Salmonella infects avian hosts , including chickens , in which the body temperature is nearer 42 C . 
When Salmonella is exposed to temperatures exceeding 40 C , heat shock proteins are induced . 
The promoters of genes coding for the heat shock proteins differ considerably from the sigma 70 promoters and contain the consensus sequence CTTGAAA at position 35 and CCCCAT at 
10 relative to the transcriptional start . 
Such promoters are recognised by the alternative sigma factor , sigma H , the heat shock-speciﬁc sigma subunit of RNA polymer-ase [ 76 -- 78 ] . 
Heat shock proteins belong to two main classes -- chaperones required for folding and/or refolding of misfolded proteins , and proteases which degrade misfolded proteins . 
The former group includes GroEL / ES , DnaK/DnaJ and Ags chaperones [ 79 -- 81 ] , the latter group includes proteases such as HtrA or ClpP [ 82,83 ] . 
Despite the different function of chaperones and prote-ases , both help to maintain protein functionality under stressful conditions . 
Although these proteins are frequently linked with heat shock , they are in fact essential for protein repair under all stressful conditions . 
It is not surprising , therefore , that mutants in protein repair are frequently attenuated in virulence for mice , primarily because of their decreased ability to resist the bactericidal agents produced by macrophages [ 80,84 -- 86 ] . 
Heat shock can be understood as a stress inﬂicted on the bacterial cell from the outside and thus occurring on the outer side of cytoplasmic membrane . 
Besides sigma H , Salmonella encodes another alternative sigma factor , sigma E which is essential for Salmonella survival under extra cytoplasmic stress . 
The origin of such stress can be different , either heat or cold shock [ 87 ] , activity of anti-microbial peptides [ 88 ] or oxidative stress [ 89 ] . 
RpoE is also necessary for the increased stress resistance associated with stationary phase cells [ 90 ] and consistent with this , the amount of RpoE increases in stationary phase cell . 
The signal for this is the presence of misfolded proteins . 
RpoE is therefore upregulated in dsbA or sodCI mutants [ 89 ] in which greater amount of misfolded proteins are expected . 
rpoE mutants are strongly attenuated for mice , both after per oral and intra-venous application . 
The level of attenuation is so great that infection with rpoE mutants does not even raise a protective immunity against subsequent challenge with the wildtype strain [ 88 ] . 
3.1 . 
Heat and outer membrane shock 
3.2 . 
Osmotic shock 
When Salmonella is shifted to an environment under high osmotic pressure , the bacterium aims to increase internal osmotic pressure to maintain cell turgor . 
This happens by the cytoplasmic accumulation of solutes which are tolerated by the whole cellular machinery 
Adaptation 
Central regulator 
Role in 
Inorganic acid Organic acid 
PhoPQ OmpR Fur RpoS OxrG 
Virulence Virulence Stress Stress ? 
Stationary phase Exponential phase 
20 m 60 m ? 
in at pH 5 in at pH 5 
? 
? 
Acid induction of phoPQ and ompR inﬂuences also the regulation of Salmonella virulence factors . 
3.1 . 
Heat and outer membrane shock 
3.2 . 
Osmotic shock 
Potassium is the preferred ion for uptake by the cell [ 91 ] . 
The ionic balance is then balanced by intracellular synthesis of glutamate [ 92 -- 94 ] . 
If the environment is limited in potassium or if the osmotic pressure can not be regulated by potassium alone , Salmonella can increase uptake or biosynthesis of other osmoprotectants such as betaine ( N,N,N-trimethyl glycine ) , proline and trehalose [ 92,95 ] . 
In a response to increased osmotic pressure , Sal-monella can also modify the composition of its outer membrane . 
This process is sensed by a two-component signal transduction system consisting of EnvZ sensor and OmpR response regulator . 
As a consequence , in high salt concentration , the OmpF porin is replaced by the OmpC porin which forms outer membrane pores with a smaller diameter thus decreasing the inﬂux of sol-utes into the periplasm [ 96,97 ] . 
3.3. Response to bile
Bile is produced in the liver and consists mainly of bile salts , cholesterol and bilirubin . 
Due to its strong detergent action against lipids , it also has a strong anti-microbial effect . 
Little is known about the effects of bile on Salmonella . 
It is thought that lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) and active eﬄux of bile components out of the cell are the primary defense barriers against its action . 
The importance of LPS has been demonstrated [ 98,99 ] . 
Besides this , only a limited number of genes are known to contribute to bile resistance . 
This includes phoP [ 100 ] , tolR [ 98 ] and wec [ 99 ] . 
phoP is a member of a two-component signal transduction system which is also involved in low pH resistance and resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptides . 
Resistance to these peptides is mostly dependent on lipid A modiﬁcation of the outer leaﬂet of the outer membrane [ 101 ] , which probably reduces permeability not only to CAMPs but also to components of bile . 
The tol genes encode an outer membrane protein the function of which is to maintain membrane integrity [ 102,103 ] . 
Tol also serves as a receptor for certain phages [ 104 ] and as a colicin transport channel [ 105,106 ] . 
The WecA and WecB proteins are responsible for the synthesis of the Enterobacterial common antigen , a glycolipid different from LPS present in the outer membrane . 
These ﬁndings suggest that the main defense of Salmonella is based on not allowing bile components to pass through the outer membrane . 
A limited amount of bile probably crosses both the outer and cytoplasmic membranes and reaches the cytoplasm . 
Recently a mutant in acrAB , defective in an eﬄux pump was shown to be sensitive to low concentrations of bile [ 107 ] suggesting an alternative defense mechanism against bile . 
Bile also serves as a signal suppressing the invasion machinery of Salmonella [ 108 ] . 
It is expected that such regulation results in Salmonella not expressing genes from SPI1 as long as it remains local-ised in the lumen of the gut . 
Once Salmonella have eficiently interacted with the mucus layer where bile concentration is expected to be lower , the SPI1-encoded type III secretion system is induced and Salmonella becomes capable of invading epithelial cells . 
In 1 -- 3 % of Salmonella-infected human individuals , infection of Salmonella serovars Typhi and Paratyphi results in a carrier state . 
In these cases , one of the most important sites for Salmonella survival appears to be the gall bladder . 
Salmonella may colonise the surface of gallstones forming a bioﬁlm resistant to the inhibitory activity of bile . 
Genes essential for such colonisation include galE , luxS and those coding for ﬂagella [ 109,110 ] . 
For ﬂagella , it is expected that these allow Salmonella to come into contact with the gallstone as well as enabling contact between different Salmonella cells forming a bio-ﬁlm . 
The function of the other two genes is unknown in this context . 
Experimental work with S. Choleraesuis , which does not generally colonise the chicken gut also showed preferential localisation in the gall bladder in the small number of chickens where establishment had taken place [ 111 ] . 
3.4. Switch from aerobiosis to microaerobiosis and anaerobiosis inside the gut
As Salmonella passes through the intestine , oxygen availability decreases and in the large intestine the environment is essentially anaerobic although this is less likely to be the case close to the mucosa . 
Salmonella is therefore required to gradually switch from aerobic to a predominantly anaerobic metabolism , rather as a natural response to a gradually changing environment than as a stress response . 
There are two major regulatory circuits , dependent on Fnr and ArcAB , respectively [ 112 ] . 
ArcAB represents a two-component signal transduction system while Fnr is a cytoplasmic protein reacting to subtle changes of oxygen concentration in the cytoplasm . 
Although the Fnr and ArcAB regulatory systems can work independently , they frequently operate in a coordinated fashion to control gene expression . 
ArcB is an inner membrane sensor protein monitoring changes in the redox status of membrane located quinones [ 113 ] . 
After oxidation of two cysteine residues , ArcB autophosphorylates , transfers the phosphate to ArcA [ 114 ] and the activated ArcA-P controls gene transcription . 
ArcA is most active under microaerobic and anaerobic conditions [ 26,115 ] when it suppresses genes encoding enzymes of TCA cycle , probably to decrease respiration under less favourable conditions . 
This has two consequences , a decrease in the production of harmful oxygen radicals and saving endogenous energy sources [ 116 ] . 
The ArcAB system can also act as a positive regulator by the induction of cydAB ( cytochrome d oxidase ) involved in respiration under oxygen-limiting conditions , and of the cob and pdu operons important for cobalamin-dependent utilisation of 1,2-propanediol 
In both these cases , ArcAB regulates expression of these target genes in association with Fnr [ 117 -- 120 ] , although in the case of pdu/cob the collaborative action of ArcAB and Fnr is indirect . 
Salmonella can synthetise cobalamin de novo generally only under anaerobic conditions and under such conditions , propanediol can be utilised only with tetrathionate as a ﬁnal electron acceptor in anaerobic respiration . 
While the cob/pdu operons are controlled by ArcAB , the ttr operon , which encodes enzymes essential for tetrathionate respiration , is positively regulated by Fnr [ 120,121 ] . 
Propanediol utilisation under anaerobic conditions is therefore dependent on both ArcAB and Fnr . 
Fnr , in Salmonella also called OxrA , is a cytoplasmic sensor of oxygen . 
It is a Fe -- S [ 4Fe -- 4S ] cluster protein and in the presence of oxygen this cluster is oxidised in two steps into the [ 2Fe -- 2S ] form [ 122,123 ] . 
Fnr binds at promoter sequences usually at position 41 relative to the start of transcription , although it can also bind at position 61 , 71 , 81 and 91 depending on the particular promoter structure [ 124 ] . 
The sequence recognised by Fnr is palindromic ( TTGATN4ATCAA ) . 
When bound to this sequence , Fnr interacts with the RpoA subunit of RNA polymerase increasing the eficiency of transcription [ 125 ] . 
In Salmonella grown under anaerobic conditions , Fnr positively regulates expression of alternative terminal acceptors [ 126 ] . 
However , besides its role in anaerobic respiration control , Fnr also regulates expression of , amongst other things , the ami-notripeptidase pepT [ 127 ] and one of the major porins in outer membrane , ompD [ 128 ] . 
Both ArcAB and Fnr , due to their regulatory activities , regulate production of and defense against reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermediates [ 116,129,130 ] . 
This would suggest that mutants in arcAB or fnr should show reduced virulence as such reactive species are experienced by Salmonella in the Salmonella-containing vacu-ole in eukaryotic cells . 
However , inactivation of neither arcAB nor fnr reduces virulence or the ability to colonise the host by S. typhimurium suggesting that these proteins and their regulons probably are not highly expressed in vivo [ 130,131 ] . 
Inactivation of fnr in S. typhi even increased invasiveness [ 132 ] . 
3.5. Interaction with gut microﬂora
When Salmonella colonises the gut , it interacts with the numerically dominant and highly complex micro-ﬂora . 
All bacteria produce metabolites which can be inimical to other bacterial species . 
Such metabolites may be ( i ) simple metabolic byproducts ( e.g. , short chain fatty acids ) , ( ii ) metabolites produced deliberately to reduce growth of competing bacteria ( e.g. , colicins produced by E. coli and other related bacteria ) and ( iii ) metabolites which modify their own metabolism according to the size of their own population ( quorum sensing ) or the presence of other bacteria . 
In addition , the mere presence of gut microﬂora may result in Salmonella experiencing dificulties with nutrient uptake and induction of the stringent response . 
Log10 of cfu ml -- 1 
Log10 of cfu ml -- 
3.5.1. Species-speciﬁc growth inhibition
It is a matter of debate whether Salmonella colonising the gut resembles more closely exponentially growing cells or a culture in a stationary phase . 
A Vibrio cholerae culture inoculated into ligated ileal loops was replicating exponentially for upto 8 h post-inoculation but soon after , the culture appeared to be in stationary phase [ 75 ] . 
Resistance to stresses associated with stationary-phase growth has been largely associated to RpoS-depen-dent mechanisms [ 21 ] . 
However , stationary-phase growth , deﬁned as the cessation of increase in numbers , can be reached either by insuficient carbon source allocation or due to the lack of electron acceptors [ 26 ] . 
Actually , in nutrient-rich media in vitro , stationary-phase metabo-lism is usually rpoS-independent [ 133 ] . 
Instead , systems involved in nutrient uptake ( tdcC , ﬂiM , yhjH , crp ) and microaerophilic respiration ( nuo and cyd operons , arcA , aroA , aroD ) are central to stationary phase as inactivation of either of these genes results in growth non-sup-pressive ( GNS ) phenotype [ 131,133 -- 136 ] . 
GNS mutants are unable to suppress multiplication of the wild-type strains when these are inoculated into the mutant s stationary phase culture ( Fig. 2 ) . 
However , most of the GNS mutants had no effect on the ability to compete with a parental strain in the intestine of newly hatched chickens [ 131 ] suggesting that the redox and nutritional conditions in the gut were different and possibly more anaerobic . 
Therefore , a further completely anaerobic in vitro screen for such mutants was performed which identiﬁed a role for ﬂhA , aspA and dcuAB in S. typhimu-rium [ 137 ] and dapF , aroD , sgaT or tatA in S. Hadar [ 138 ] , most of them related to nutrient uptake or anaerobic respiration . 
However , even in this case such mutants were fully competitive in vivo ( with the exception of dapF in S. Hadar ) , suggesting that respiration is likely to be less important in the gut of the newly hatched chicken than substrate-level phosphorylation . 
A fermentative process is thus likely to be a major contributor to energy balance in the gut , as shown by the total inability of ackA and pta mutants to colonise ( Barrow & Lovell , unpublished results ) . 
What therefore is the role of electron transport in the life of Salmonella since it is assumed , that little active growth occurs in the environment ? 
Given the non-lactose fermenting nature of the vast majority of Salmonella ser-ovars , the original source of these organisms may be reptilian . 
Since respiration contributes considerably to energy balance in the tissues of the warm blooded animals , it may be that this contributes to Salmonella stimulating an active ejection process ( gastro-enteritis ) after colonisation of the gut of apparently the `` wrong '' host . 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 0 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 0 
wt 
GNS mutant 
GASP mutant 
wt 
80 
80 
20 40 60 20 40 60 Incubation time ( h ) Incubation time ( h ) 
Fig. 2 . 
Growth inhibition in stationary phase cultures of Salmonella . 
GNS ( growth non-suppressive ) mutants are unable to suppress multiplication of the wild-type strain when this is inoculated in their stationary phase culture ( left panel ) . 
GASP ( growth advantage in stationary phase ) mutants are capable of growing through the stationary culture of the wild-type strain . 
3.5.2. Stringent response
When Salmonella experiences nutrient depletion intracellular concentrations of ppGpp increase . 
This metabolite serves as an alarmone and it is one of many factors involved in the expression of rpoS . 
ppGpp is produced by RelA and SpoT . 
The RelA protein is associated with 1 -- 2 % of ribosomes and senses the amounts of discharged tRNAs coming into contact with the ribosome . 
If the ratio of discharged : charged tRNAs increases , RelA catalyses ppGpp production . 
The SpoT protein also senses the ratio of charged : discharged tRNAs and as a result of this , produces ppGpp . 
SpoT is also thought to be involved in ppGpp degradation . 
When the concentration of ppGpp increases , synthesis of non-coding RNA ( e.g. , rRNAs and tRNAs ) is suppressed and expression of genes coding for enzymes catalysing amino acid biosynthesis is induced [ 21,139 ] . 
ppGpp also stimulates expression of the alternative sigma subunit of RNA polymerase , RpoS [ 140 ] . 
Salmonella relA spoT double mutants are highly attenuated for mice [ 141,142 ] . 
3.5.3. SCFA
Exposure to short chain fatty acids ( SCFA ) , namely acetate , propionate and butyrate is one of the stresses which Salmonella experiences when colonising the intes-tinal tract . 
Salmonella may experience these acids ﬁrst in the crop . 
Unlike the intestine , the pH in the crop is relatively low ( see above ) , and under these conditions , SCFA may induce acid tolerance [ 32,143 ] prior to entry into the gizzard ( stomach ) . 
In E. coli , the genes induced by SCFA overlap with those of the RpoS regulon although induction of rpoS itself is not enough for the increased acid resistance observed since rpoS induced by osmotic shock by NaCl or sodium acetate did not protect E. coli from subsequent exposure to pH 3 [ 143 ] . 
PhoP , another regulatory protein involved in acid tolerance , is not involved in induction of acid tolerance by exposure to SCFA as its deletion can lead to even greater survival in Salmonella at low pH , consistent with its role in inorganic acid stress response described above [ 6 ] . 
Individual or mixed SCFA decrease Salmonella growth rate in vitro [ 144 ] . 
This effect correlates with the pH of the environment -- each SCFA being more effective at pH 5 or 6 than at pH 7 [ 145 ] . 
Individual SCFAs differ in their effects on Salmonella invasion of epithelial cell lines . 
Butyrate suppresses while acetate seems to stimulate invasion of tissue culture cells [ 146,147 ] . 
Acetate , but not propionate or butyrate , was shown to induce hilA and invF regulators of SPI1 at neutral pH which may explain different invasiveness of Sal-monella grown in the presence of different SCFAs . 
These in vitro studies are consistent with the results of experimental infections of birds fed different SCFAs . 
Feed enriched with acetate resulted in increased Salmonella colonisation of the host while butyrate-fed birds were more resistant to intestinal colonisation by Salmonella , despite the fact that such treatment did not inﬂuence Salmonella invasion into deeper tissue such as liver and spleen [ 148 ] . 
3.5.4. Bacteriocins
Bacteriocins are peptides of microbial origin which are produced by both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria , including major components of the gut ﬂora such as Lactobacillus sp. , Enterococcus sp . 
and E. coli [ 149,150 ] . 
Production of bacteriocins by particular microorganisms is frequently linked with their ability to decrease Salmonella colonisation of experimental animals [ 151 ] although much earlier work tended to suggest that they were unimportant . 
Production of colicins encoded by the ColV plasmid increases colonisation ability in E. coli but this may be related to iron acquisition genes [ 152 -- 154 ] . 
However , essentially nothing is known about Salmonella defense against bacteriocins . 
Overexpression of the mar locus , encoding an eficient eﬄux pump , results in increased resistance to microcin 24 [ 155 ] . 
It may be speculated that , because some of the bacteriocins utilise iron uptake receptors for their transport into a cell [ 156 -- 158 ] , expression of the Fur regulon in Salmonella may produce increased or decrease resistance of Salmonella to such bacteriocins . 
However , whether the presence of sublethal levels of bacteriocin is sensed and by what mechanisms and whether this results in increased bacteriocin resistance of Salmonella similarly to acid tolerance response , or whether such stress is translated into a resistance against other forms of stress or suppression of Salmonella virulence factors , is completely unknown . 
3.5.5. Quorum sensing
Numerous bacterial species have been shown to be able to sense the density of their own population through the production and perception of speciﬁc metabolites termed autoinducers . 
When the autoinducer concentration reaches a threshold , when the bacterial population reaches a certain quorum , speciﬁc metabolic pathways are induced . 
In gram-negative bacteria two main systems are used , utilising either autoinducer 1 ( AI-1 ) or autoinducer 2 ( AI-2 ) . 
AI-1 is an acyl homoserine lactone and is generally species speciﬁc . 
AI-2 based quorum sensing is dependent on the production of a furanone-like compound and is believed to be used for wider interspecies communication as AI-2 activity has been detected in many different bacterial species . 
The AI-1 dependent system typically consists of a LuxR sensor and regulator , and LuxI , the AI-1 synthase . 
A key protein for the synthesis of AI-2 is LuxS . 
Interestingly , S. typhimurium harbours in its genome luxR and luxS homologues but no luxI homologue . 
This suggests that quorum sensing in Salmonella may be different from other bacterial species . 
3.5.5.1 . 
Quorum sensing in Salmonella and sdiA . 
In S. typhimurium the homologue of luxR is sdiA . 
However , there is no obvious homologue of the AI-1 synthase luxI in the S. typhimurium genome . 
This , together with sequence analysis , led to the conclusion that sdiA was acquired by E. coli and S. typhimurium by horizontal transfer [ 159 ] which may explain some of the unusual properties of sdiA described below , mainly its ability to react with autoinducers produced by other bacterial species . 
Simultaneously , horizontal transfer without the luxI homologue would enable separate evolution of sdiA resulting in its unique characteristics in Salmonella . 
The sdiA gene was ﬁrst described in E. coli as a suppressor of the division inhibition effect in a minCD mutant . 
Suppression was obtained after overexpression of sdiA from a multicopy plasmid leading to overexpression of the ftsQAZ locus which resulted in conversion of aberrant ﬁlamentous cells back to the typical rod shape [ 160,161 ] . 
In parallel , a search for an E. coli autoinducer was made . 
Surprisingly , there were reports on both SdiA-dependent up - or downregulation of the ftsQAZ promoter by spent ( conditioned ) medium obtained from E. coli cultures [ 161,162 ] . 
However , these effects were quite weak and the induction or suppression was never greater than twofold . 
In E. coli , SdiA was also shown to contribute to virulence gene regulation in enterohaemorrhagic strains of serotype O157 : H7 [ 163 ] . 
The same authors also noted that upon overexpression of sdiA , motility in 0.25 % agar decreased . 
Overexpression of sdiA in E. coli also led to increased resistance to xenobiotics through the activation of the AcrAB multidrug eﬄux pump [ 164,165 ] . 
Genome-wide microarray analysis in E. coli conﬁrmed these observations showing that sdiA overexpression leads to increased expression of ftsQAZ , acrAB and suppressed ﬂagella expression [ 166 ] . 
sdiA in Salmonella was ﬁrst described by Ahmer et al. [ 167 ] when this group suggested a link between sdiA and positive regulation of ten genes on the virulence plasmid including the previously characterised rck gene responsible for increased resistance to complement killing and adhesion to epithelial cells [ 168 ] . 
Although sdiA in S. typhimurium seems to be suppressed by conditioned medium to the extent observed in E. coli [ 169 ] , no AI-1 like metabolite was ever detected also in S. typhimu-rium conditioned media . 
Ahmer and his colleagues therefore suggested that SdiA may sense autoinducers produced by other bacterial species [ 170,171 ] . 
In parallel to these studies , we showed that a sdiA mutant is not defective in stationary phase survival [ 131 ] but is of increased virulence for mice [ 169 ] . 
The fur box 19 bp upstream from the sdiA start codon was also identiﬁed and its function in relationship to iron deprivation by dipyridyl was shown [ 169 ] . 
Because the Fur protein which binds the fur box is also involved in acid resistance [ 43 ] , we extended our experiments and found that sdiA is induced in S. typhimurium when the bacterial culture is inoculated in LB at pH 4 under fully aerobic conditions [ 172 ] . 
SdiA in Salmonella and E. coli may therefore integrate several external stimuli . 
It can sense sudden reductions in pH. Upon its upregulation , the Ac-rAB eﬄux pump is induced [ 165,166 ] possibly increasing resistance of Salmonella to bile . 
When acid stress is alleviated after leaving the stomach , induced SdiA may react with autoinducers produced by other bacteria present in the gut and may induce rck resulting in increased attachment to epithelial cells . 
This would be particularly important in the distal parts of the ileum where M cells are concentrated . 
3.5.5.2 . 
Quorum sensing in Salmonella and luxS . 
Numerous gram-positive as well as gram-negative bacteria including Salmonella can produce AI-2 [ 173,174 ] . 
luxS gene was identiﬁed as essential for AI-2 production in E. coli and S. typhimurium [ 175 ] . 
The highest AI-2 production by S. typhimurium is observed in late exponential phase and after entry into stationary phase the AI-2 is degraded . 
The presence of glucose in nutrient rich media , low pH and high osmolarity stimulates AI-2 production and release from Salmonella cells [ 176,177 ] . 
The exact biological function of LuxS an 
AI-2 in Salmonella is unknown . 
In E. coli and Shigella the function of AI-2 has been investigated in greater detail . 
In E. coli , the type III secretion systems encoded by the LEE1 and LEE2 loci are stimulated threefold by the addition of conditioned medium . 
However , no experimental animal infections were carried out using E. coli luxS mutants [ 178,179 ] . 
In Shigella , conditioned medium also stimulated virulence-related genes including virB but invasion of a luxS mutant in tissue culture was unaffected . 
Similarly , luxS mutants of Shigella were capable of causing keratoconjuctivitis in the Sereny test in guiney pigs [ 180 ] . 
3.5.5.3 . 
Biological signiﬁcance of quorum sensing in Salmonella . 
The biological function of quorum sensing in Salmonella remains unclear . 
Initially , it was speculated that quorum sensing may prevent full expression of virulence before the size of the bacterial population becomes high enough to successfully deal with the immune system of the host [ 181,182 ] . 
However , recent ﬁndings in V. cholerae showed that quorum sensing may act also to downregulate virulence after successful colonisation of the host to decrease continued damage to the host [ 183 ] . 
Interestingly , it has been shown that Hha , a negative regulator of hilA in S. typhimurium [ 184 ] , is induced tenfold upon exposure of E. coli to conditioned medium containing AI-2 [ 185 ] . 
Since hilA is a central regulator of Salmonella invasion into the epithelial cells , quorum sensing may act as a negative regulator of virulence also in Salmonella . 
This can be further supported by the observation of slightly increased virulence of S. typhimurium sdiA for mice after per oral infection [ 169 ] . 
It is also not clear why LuxI homologues are missing from the S. typhimurium genome and whether luxS and sdiA interact in Salmonella . 
Overlap of AI-1 and AI-2 signalling has been documented in V. harveyi in which these two systems co-regulate bioluminescence [ 186,187 ] . 
However , the vast majority of bacterial spe-cies utilise exclusively either AI-1 or AI-2 based quorum sensing . 
Our recent observations show that sdiA in Salmonella is induced in environments at pH values lower than 5 and such induction was not observed in an luxS mutant [ 172 ] . 
Interplay between sdiA and luxS was described also in E. coli [ 179 ] . 
Consistent with our observation , several reports have appeared indicating that , in different bacterial species , luxS is induced upon acidiﬁcation [ 177,188,189 ] . 
Next , quorum-sensing systems have been repeatedly shown to overlap with iron metabolism or uptake [ 190,191 ] . 
It is therefore possible that in Salmonella the quorum-sensing machinery , upon horizontal acquisition of the LuxR homologue only [ 159 ] , evolved into a system for sensing of acidic environments and response to iron although the reasons for and consequences of this are currently unknown but are likely to be associated with colonisation and virulence . 
Acid-associated sdiA induction is deﬁnitively not a question of a mere survival since a sdiA deletion mutant survives as well as does the wild-type strain in LB , pH 4 , for a week ( I. Rychlik , unpublished observations ) . 
3.6. Cationic antimicrobial peptides
After Salmonella passage through the acid stomach environment and the small intestinal environment rich in bacterial microﬂora , the microorganisms ﬁnally approach epithelial cells which may be protected by anti-microbial agents including cationic antimicrobial peptides ( CAMP ) . 
CAMP are produced by mammalian , bird , insect and even plant cells in response to microbial infection . 
In all of these living systems , CAMPs represent a central component of the innate immune system which can protect cells against microbial infection within minutes of contact with infectious agents . 
CAMP are found on a number of mucosal surfaces including the epithelium of the respiratory and intestinal tracts [ 192 ] and are likely to affect colonisation and infection [ 193 ] . 
They are also present in azurophilic granules of neutro-phils where they represent the most potent non-oxida-tive killing mechanism [ 194 ] . 
The production of some of them may be induced upon contact with Salmonella [ 195 ] . 
CAMP are peptides 15 -- 50 amino acid long . 
They are active against both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria as well as enveloped viruses and some parasites . 
Structurally they can be classiﬁed into four major clas-ses , a-helical , b-sheet , extended structure and looped [ 194 ] . 
Regardless of their structure they are known to interact with negatively charged lipid membranes . 
In gram-negative microorganisms they interact with lipid A of LPS on the outer leaﬂet of the outer membrane . 
After the initial electrostatic interaction they ﬂip into the lipid bilayer [ 196 ] . 
Once the ﬁrst molecule of CAMP is inserted into the outer membrane , others interact in a co-operative manner forming channels . 
Gaining access to the periplasmic space , CAMPs are thought to interact with the cytoplasmic membrane in a similar manner forming channels which results in a decrease of membrane potential , leakage of biologically active chemicals and cell death . 
This is the most probable mode of action of most of the CAMP although other mechanisms can not be ruled out as some CAMPs can effectively translocate across artiﬁcial membranes [ 197 ] and therefore may affect and destroy targets inside bacterial cell . 
Because of a strong afinity of CAMPs for LPS , killing of bacteria does not result in massive LPS release and therefore pro-inﬂammatory cytokine responses are not induced , unlike the situation of antibiotic killing [ 198 ] . 
Salmonella , as an intestinal and intracellular parasite , has to deal with CAMP action when colonising the host . 
The Salmonella response to CAMP centres on eithe modiﬁcation of the lipid A structure or CAMP cleavage [ 101 ] . 
The most frequent modiﬁcation of lipid A is its additional palmitoylation due to the activity of PagP [ 196 ] or biosynthesis of lipid A with 4-aminoarabinose due to the cooperative activity of the whole pmrHFIJKL operon [ 58,199 ] . 
The PgtE protein of S. typhimurium can inactivate CAMPs by proteolytic cleavage [ 200 ] . 
Salmo-nella is also capable of 3-O-deacylation of lipid A catalysed by PagL , although the biological meaning of this modiﬁcation is not clear because pagL mutants display no obvious phenotype [ 201 ] . 
All of the genes involved in CAMP resistance belong to the phoPQ regulon although the pmrHFIJKL or ugd genes are regulated by PhoPQ indirectly through the PmrAB signal transduction system [ 58,202,203 ] . 
This clearly shows that the PhoPQ regulon is central to Salmonella protection against CAMP ( Fig. 3 ) although PhoPQ-independent CAMP resistance has been also described [ 204 ] . 
The PhoPQ regulon is responsible for most of the CAMP resistance including the resistance to defensin , magainin , melittin , mastoparan or cecropin P1 [ 205 ] . 
PmrAB regulates only the 4-aminoarabinose modiﬁcation of lipid A and therefore is responsible for the resistance to a smal-ler subset of CAMPs such as polymyxin [ 199,202 ] . 
RpoS is not involved in CAMP resistance although the presence of CAMP is sensed by RpoS but is translated into increased general stress resistance [ 206 ] and not into CAMP resistance itself . 
Resistance to CAMP can be induced in Salmonella by its exposure to formate , succinate or sub-lethal concentrations of CAMP [ 206,207 ] . 
Formate can be produced by competitive microﬂora in the intestine and therefore contact with formate can increase Salmonella resistance to CAMP prior to its contact with CAMP on the surface of epithelium or in the phagolysosome of macrophages . 
It is no surprise that inability to resist CAMP action leads to Salmonella attenuation [ 205 ] . 
It is confusing that CAMPs can suppress SPI1-encoded type III secretion system of Salmonella which is necessary for the entry into epithelial cells [ 206 ] . 
This would suggest that CAMP resistance is mainly essential for intracellular survival of Salmonella in macrophages where the SPI1-encoded TTSS is not needed and can be suppressed [ 64,208 ] . 
This is also supported by the central role of the PhoPQ regulon in CAMP resistance as it is well described that PhoP is induced and activated in low pH , low magnesium and low ionic strength environment which is present in macrophage phagolysosomes [ 63 ] . 
However , at least one Salmonella mutant sensitive to CAMP action in vitro was attenuated after per oral infection but not after intra peritoneal inoculation [ 58 ] which suggests that there may be a differential Salmo-nella response to CAMP produced on the epithelial surfaces and those produced in the phagolysosome of macrophages and neutrophils where phoPQ regulon plays a dominant role ( see Fig. 3 ) . 
target target pagP , pagL pmrHFIJKL mgtA , mgtBC prgH , fliC unknown unknown pgtE ugd phoN , pcgL 
Fig. 3 . 
Role of phoPQ in stress response in S. typhimurium . 
PhoPQ regulatory system is most frequently associates with response to Mg . 
However , 2 + it also controls response to inorganic acid pH , and bile and CAMP resistance . 
In resistance to particular CAMPs , role of PhoPQ is indirect through the regulation of another two-component signal transduction system PmrAB . 
4. Concluding remarks
Salmonella has evolved several overlapping systems that deal with stress responses , which are of particular relevance during infection of the host ( Fig. 4 ) . 
Despite overlapping , acid resistance operates at the top of all of the adaptations possibly because it is the very ﬁrst stress which is encountered by Salmonella immediately after infection . 
The central role of acid resistance and stress can be based on the fact that acid adapted cells are resistant to a variety of other stresses such as heat or oxidative stress while heat or oxygen stressed cells are not resistant to low pH. The central role of the acid stress may also explain the results of microarray analysis of V. cholerae inoculated directly into ligated rabbit ileal loops . 
In this study , the stress regulators were not observed among the most expressed genes [ 75 ] . 
Salmonella cells infecting the host from the environment are usually not replicating and therefore may resemble stationary phase cells , which are naturally of increased resistance to low pH and as such , these cells are ready for infection . 
The natural resistance of these cells can be further potentiated by the low pH presen in the crop of birds by the induction of the stationary phase acid tolerance response . 
Additional defense mechanisms are induced after contact with bile and SCFA present in the intestine . 
These maintain activation of the low pH stress response mechanisms of Sal-monella and in addition , induce resistance to antimicrobial peptides produced by the host cells . 
Sensing different adverse stimuli always allows Salmonella to adapt to the stress likely to be encountered and thus to successfully colonise the host . 
Key players in Salmo-nella stress response in intestinal colonisation are RpoS , PhoPQ , Fur or OmpR/EnvZ , which are not spe-ciﬁc to this genus , showing that the stress adaptation was already evolved in an ancient ancestor , but whether this was also a gut coloniser is impossible to say . 
Although regulons of individual stress regulators may have adopted additional functions later in evolution ( such as PhoPQ regulon and its role in Salmonella virulence ) , one can imagine that the basic stress resistance is likely to be similar in all microorganisms and with some caution in interpretation , knowledge from the Salmonella stress response may perhaps be extrapolated to other microbial species . 
Finally , these regulators are only partly necessary for Salmonella virulence . 
The role of oxidative stress response is confusing since mutations in oxyR and soxRS are not attenuating ( Table 2 ) , although mutations in sodCI or sodCII superoxide dismutases are [ 209,210 ] . 
Other stress responsive pathways such a heat shock contribute to Salmonella virulence mainly during its intracellular survival . 
Stress-related genes which are induced inside macro-phages include htrA protease and pgtE . 
Moreover , within more than 400 ORFs of unknown function which are upregulated inside macrophage , a number of stress regulators can be expected [ 211 ] . 
Stress response genes are therefore suitable targets for inactivation , either with a purpose of the construction of attenuated Salmonella strain to be used for vaccination against salmonellosis itself , or with a purpose of the construction of attenuated carrier strain suitable for the expression of heterologous antigens . 
For these purposes , inactivation of genes coding for regulators of acid resistance and resistance to CAMPs seems to be the most suitable . 
This also shows which stress regulons are the most important for gut colonisation . 
Another group of target genes are those involved in stringent response , outer membrane shock and protein turnover . 
However , in these it is a question whether the attenuation of such mutants is due to their reduced capacity to colonise the gut or whether this is due t a reduced ability of these mutants to survive intracellularily . 
inorganic acid bile resistance CAMP resistance Fe 3 + resistance 
other 
pmrAB 
positive 
negative 
target target pagP , pagL pmrHFIJKL mgtA , mgtBC prgH , fliC unknown unknown pgtE ugd phoN , pcgL 
Fig. 3 . 
Role of phoPQ in stress response in S. typhimurium . 
PhoPQ regulatory system is most frequently associates with response to Mg . 
However , 2 + it also controls response to inorganic acid pH , and bile and CAMP resistance . 
In resistance to particular CAMPs , role of PhoPQ is indirect through the regulation of another two-component signal transduction system PmrAB . 
environment stress factor 
regulons induced 
result 
rpoS , csp 
general stress resistance 
out of host1 cold , lownutrients 
flow of infection 
crop 
acid pH , SCFA 
ompR , rpoS 
birds only 
stationary acid tolerance induced ( ompR ) SCFA stimulated rpoS acid resistance 
stomach 
extreme acid pH 
rpoS , fur , ompR , phoP phoP induced , bile resistance induced rpoS induced , SCFA resistance induced 
bile 
phoP 
membrane modifications , invasion suppressed 
duodenum 
decreased O2 supply fnr , arcA 
switch from aerobiosis to anaerobiosis 
ileum 
SCFA 
rpoS 
acid-induced cross-resistance to SCFA SCFA induce CAMP resistance 
??? 
bacteriocins 
??? 
competitive flora quorum sensing 
sdiA , luxS 
virulence regulation , acid stress ? 
CAMP 
phoP 
epithelium 
LPS modifications , 
resistance to macropahge CAMPs 
csp , rpoS , arcA , fnr oxyR , soxRS 
out of host 2 cold shock low nutrients aerobioisis 
Fig. 4 . 
Flow chart of the different stresses experienced by Salmonella when colonising susceptible host . 
Experiencing one form of shock always make Salmonella of increased resistance to the stress likely to be encountered during the next step of infection , e.g. , acid stress increases Salmonella resistance to bile and CAMPs , etc. . 
Acknowledgements
I. Rychlik has been supported by projects LN00A016 from the Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic and MZE0002716201 from the Ministry of Agriculture of the Czech Republic . 
P. Barrow is supported by the Department of the Environment , Food and Rural Affairs , UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council , UK and the EU . 
Some of this work was supported by a grant from the EU ( CT98-4006 ) . 
I. Rychlik acknowledges also an excellent technical assistance of S. Matouskova . 
References 
[ 1 ] Lee , I.S. , Slonczewski , J.L. and Foster , J.W. ( 1994 ) A low-pH-inducible , stationary-phase acid tolerance response in Salmonella typhimurium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
176 , 1422 -- 1426 . 
[ 2 ] Foster , J.W. ( 1991 ) Salmonella acid shock proteins are required for the adaptive acid tolerance response . 
J. Bacteriol . 
173 , 6896 -- 6902 . 
[ 3 ] Foster , J.W. and Hall , H.K. ( 1990 ) Adaptive acidiﬁcation tolerance response of Salmonella typhimurium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
172 , 771 -- 778 . 
[ 4 ] Foster , J.W. and Hall , H.K. ( 1991 ) Inducible pH homeostasis and the acid tolerance response of Salmonella typhimurium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
173 , 5129 -- 5135 . 
[ 5 ] Valdivia , R.H. and Falkow , S. ( 1996 ) Bacterial genetics by ﬂow cytometry : rapid isolation of Salmonella typhimurium acid-inducible promoters by differential ﬂuorescence induction . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
22 , 367 -- 378 . 
[ 6 ] Bearson , B.L. , Wilson , L. and Foster , J.W. ( 1998 ) A low pH-inducible , PhoPQ-dependent acid tolerance response protects 
Salmonella typhimurium against inorganic acid stress . 
J. Bacteriol . 
180 , 2409 -- 2417 . 
[ 7 ] Bang , I.S. , Audia , J.P. , Park , Y.K. and Foster , J.W. ( 2002 ) Autoinduction of the ompR response regulator by acid shock and control of the Salmonella enterica acid tolerance response . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
44 , 1235 -- 1250 . 
[ 8 ] Bang , I.S. , Kim , B.H. , Foster , J.W. and Park , Y.K. ( 2000 ) OmpR regulates the stationary-phase acid tolerance response of Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
182 , 2245 -- 
[ 9 ] Foster , J.W. , Park , Y.K. , Bang , I.S. , Karem , K. , Betts , H. , Hall , H.K. and Shaw , E. ( 1994 ) Regulatory circuits involved with pH-regulated gene expression in Salmonella typhimurium . 
Microbiology 140 , 341 -- 352 . 
[ 10 ] Fang , F.C. , Libby , S.J. , Buchmeier , N.A. , Loewen , P.C. , Switala , J. , Harwood , J. and Guiney , D.G. ( 1992 ) The alternative sigma factor katF ( rpoS ) regulates Salmonella virulence . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 89 , 11978 -- 11982 . 
[ 11 ] O Neal , C.R. , Gabriel , W.M. , Turk , A.K. , Libby , S.J. , Fang , F.C. and Spector , M.P. ( 1994 ) RpoS is necessary for both the positive and negative regulation of starvation survival genes during phosphate , carbon , and nitrogen starvation in Salmonella typhimurium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
176 , 4610 -- 4616 . 
[ 12 ] Bearson , S.M. , Benjamin Jr. , W.H. , Swords , W.E. and Foster , J.W. ( 1996 ) Acid shock induction of RpoS is mediated by the mouse virulence gene mviA of Salmonella typhimurium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
178 , 2572 -- 2579 . 
[ 13 ] Chen , C.Y. , Eckmann , L. , Libby , S.J. , Fang , F.C. , Okamoto , S. , Kagnoff , M.F. , Fierer , J. and Guiney , D.G. ( 1996 ) Expression of Salmonella typhimurium rpoS and rpoS-dependent genes in the intracellular environment of eukaryotic cells . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
64 , 4739 -- 4743 . 
[ 14 ] Lee , I.S. , Lin , J. , Hall , H.K. , Bearson , B. and Foster , J.W. ( 1995 ) The stationary-phase sigma factor rS ( RpoS ) is required for a sustained acid tolerance response in virulent Salmonella typhimu-rium . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
17 , 155 -- 167 . 
[ 15 ] Chen , C.Y. , Buchmeier , N.A. , Libby , S. , Fang , F.C. , Krause , M. and Guiney , D.G. ( 1995 ) Central regulatory role for the RpoS sigma factor in expression of Salmonella dublin plasmid virulence genes . 
J. Bacteriol . 
177 , 5303 -- 5309 . 
[ 16 ] Heiskanen , P. , Taira , S. and Rhen , M. ( 1994 ) Role of rpoS in the regulation of Salmonella plasmid virulence ( spv ) genes . 
FEMS Microbiol . 
Lett . 
123 , 125 -- 130 
[ 17 ] Kowarz , L. , Coynault , C. , Robbe-Saule , V. and Norel , F. ( 1994 ) The Salmonella typhimurium katF ( rpoS ) gene : cloning , nucleo-tide sequence , and regulation of spvR and spvABCD virulence plasmid genes . 
J. Bacteriol . 
176 , 6852 -- 6860 . 
[ 18 ] Fang , F.C. , Chen , C.Y. , Guiney , D.G. and Xu , Y. ( 1996 ) Identiﬁcation of rS-regulated genes in Salmonella typhimu-rium : complementary regulatory interactions between sigma S and cyclic AMP receptor protein . 
J. Bacteriol . 
178 , 5112 -- 5120 . 
[ 19 ] Ibanez-Ruiz , M. , Robbe-Saule , V. , Hermant , D. , Labrude , S. and Norel , F. ( 2000 ) Identiﬁcation of RpoS ( rS ) - regulated genes in Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
182 , 5749 -- 5756 . 
[ 20 ] Spector , M.P. , Garcia , d.P. , Bearson , S.M. , Mahmud , A. , Magut , M. , Finlay , B.B. , Dougan , G. , Foster , J.W. and Pallen , M.J. ( 1999 ) The rpoS-dependent starvation-stress response locus stiA encodes a nitrate reductase ( narZYWV ) required for carbon-starvation-inducible thermotolerance and acid tolerance 
in Salmonella typhimurium . 
Microbiology , 3035 -- 3045 . 
[ 21 ] Neidhardt , F.C. ( Editor in Chief ) ( 1996 ) Escherichia coli and Salmonella , 2nd edition . 
ASM Press , Washington , DC 2005 , USA . . 
[ 22 ] Foster , J.W. ( 1993 ) The acid tolerance response of Salmonella typhimurium involves transient synthesis of key acid shock proteins . 
J. Bacteriol . 
175 , 1981 -- 1987 . 
[ 23 ] Farewell , A. , Kvint , K. and Nystrom , T. ( 1998 ) Negative regulation by RpoS : a case of sigma factor competition . 
Mol . 
[ 24 ] Komitopoulou , E. , Bainton , N.J. and Adams , M.R. ( 2004 ) Oxidation -- reduction potential regulates RpoS levels in Salmo-nella typhimurium . 
J. Appl . 
Microbiol . 
96 , 271 -- 278 . 
[ 25 ] Paesold , G. and Krause , M. ( 1999 ) Analysis of rpoS mRNA in Salmonella dublin : identiﬁcation of multiple transcripts with growth-phase-dependent variation in transcript stability . 
J. Bacteriol . 
181 , 1264 -- 1268 . 
[ 26 ] Sevcik , M. , Sebkova , A. , Volf , J. and Rychlik , I. ( 2001 ) 
Transcription of arcA and rpoS during growth of Salmonella typhimurium under aerobic and microaerobic conditions . 
Microbiology 147 , 701 -- 708 . 
[ 27 ] Lease , R.A. and Belfort , M. ( 2000 ) A trans-acting RNA as a control switch in Escherichia coli : DsrA modulates function by forming alternative structures . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 97 , 9919 -- 9924 . 
[ 28 ] Majdalani , N. , Chen , S. , Murrow , J. , St. John , K. and Gottesman , S. ( 2001 ) Regulation of RpoS by a novel small 
RNA : the characterization of RprA . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
39 , 1382 -- 1394 . 
[ 29 ] Majdalani , N. , Cunning , C. , Sledjeski , D. , Elliott , T. and Gottesman , S. ( 1998 ) DsrA RNA regulates translation of RpoS message by an anti-antisense mechanism , independent of its action as an antisilencer of transcription . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 95 , 12462 -- 12467 . 
[ 30 ] Audia , J.P. and Foster , J.W. ( 2003 ) Acid shock accumulation of sigma S in Salmonella enterica involves increased 
translation , not regulated degradation . 
J. Mol . 
Microbiol . 
Biotechnol . 
5 , 17 -- 28 . 
[ 31 ] Baik , H.S. , Bearson , S. , Dunbar , S. and Foster , J.W. ( 1996 ) The acid tolerance response of Salmonella typhimurium provides protection against organic acids . 
Microbiology 142 , 3195 -- 3200 . 
[ 32 ] Kwon , Y.M. and Ricke , S.C. ( 1998 ) Induction of acid resistance of Salmonella typhimurium by exposure to short-chain fatty acids . 
Appl . 
Environ . 
Microbiol . 
64 , 3458 -- 3463 . 
[ 33 ] El Gedaily , A. , Paesold , G. , Chen , C.Y. , Guiney , D.G. and 
[ 34 ] Webb , C. , Moreno , M. , Wilmes-Riesenberg , M. , Curtiss III , R. and Foster , J.W. ( 1999 ) Effects of DksA and ClpP protease on sigma S production and virulence in Salmonella typhimurium . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
34 , 112 -- 123 . 
[ 35 ] Moreno , M. , Audia , J.P. , Bearson , S.M. , Webb , C. and Foster , J.W. ( 2000 ) Regulation of sigma S degradation in Salmonella enterica var typhimurium : in vivo interactions between sigma S , the response regulator MviA ( RssB ) and ClpX . 
J. Mol . 
Microbiol . 
Biotechnol . 
2 , 245 -- 254 . 
[ 36 ] Studemann , A. , Noirclerc-Savoye , M. , Klauck , E. , Becker , G. , Schneider , D. and Hengge , R. ( 2003 ) Sequential recognition of two distinct sites in rS by the proteolytic targeting factor RssB and ClpX . 
EMBO J. 22 , 4111 -- 4120 . 
[ 37 ] Coynault , C. , Robbe-Saule , V. and Norel , F. ( 1996 ) Virulence and vaccine potential of Salmonella typhimurium mutants deﬁcient in the expression of the RpoS ( rS ) regulon . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
22 , 149 -- 160 . 
[ 38 ] Nickerson , C.A. and Curtiss III , R. ( 1997 ) Role of sigma factor RpoS in initial stages of Salmonella typhimurium infection . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
65 , 1814 -- 1823 . 
[ 39 ] Swords , W.E. , Giddings , A. and Benjamin Jr. , W.H. ( 1997 ) Bacterial phenotypes mediated by mviA and their relationship to the mouse virulence of Salmonella typhimurium . 
Microb . 
Pathog . 
[ 40 ] Methner , U. , Barrow , P.A. , Gregorova , D. and Rychlik , I. ( 2004 ) Intestinal colonisation-inhibition and virulence of Salmo-nella phoP , rpoS and ompC deletion mutants in chickens . 
Vet . 
Microbiol . 
98 , 37 -- 43 . 
[ 41 ] Jorgensen , F. , Leach , S. , Wilde , S.J. , Davies , A. , Stewart , G.S. and Humphrey , T. ( 2000 ) Invasiveness in chickens , stress resistance and RpoS status of wild-type Salmonella enterica subsp . 
enterica serovar typhimurium deﬁnitive type 104 and 
serovar enteritidis phage type 4 strains . 
Microbiology 146 , 3227 -- 3235 . 
[ 42 ] Tsolis , R.M. , Baumler , A.J. , Stojiljkovic , I. and Heffron , F. ( 1995 ) Fur regulon of Salmonella typhimurium : identiﬁcation of new iron-regulated genes . 
J. Bacteriol . 
177 , 4628 -- 4637 . 
[ 43 ] Foster , J.W. and Hall , H.K. ( 1992 ) Effect of Salmonella typhimurium ferric uptake regulator ( fur ) mutations on iron-and pH-regulated protein synthesis . 
J. Bacteriol . 
174 , 4317 -- 4323 . 
[ 44 ] Bijlsma , J.J. , Waidner , B. , Vliet , A.H. , Hughes , N.J. , Hag , S. , Bereswill , S. , Kelly , D.J. , Vandenbroucke-Grauls , C.M. , Kist , M. and Kusters , J.G. ( 2002 ) The Helicobacter pylori homologue of the ferric uptake regulator is involved in acid resistance . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
70 , 606 -- 611 . 
[ 45 ] Hall , H.K. and Foster , J.W. ( 1996 ) The role of fur in the acid tolerance response of Salmonella typhimurium is physiologically and genetically separable from its role in iron acquisition . 
J. Bacteriol . 
178 , 5683 -- 5691 . 
[ 46 ] Touati , D. , Jacques , M. , Tardat , B. , Bouchard , L. and Despied , S. ( 1995 ) Lethal oxidative damage and mutagenesis are generated by iron in delta fur mutants of Escherichia coli : protective role of superoxide dismutase . 
J. Bacteriol . 
177 , 2305 -- 2314 . 
[ 47 ] Mukhopadhyay , P. , Zheng , M. , Bedzyk , L.A. , LaRossa , R.A. and Storz , G. ( 2004 ) Prominent roles of the NorR and Fur regulators in the Escherichia coli transcriptional response to reactive nitrogen species . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 101 , 745 -- 
[ 50 ] Garcia-Del Portillo , F. , Foster , J.W. and Finlay , B.B. ( 1993 ) Role of acid tolerance response genes in Salmonella typhimurium virulence . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
61 , 4489 -- 4492 . 
[ 51 ] Miller , S.I. , Kukral , A.M. and Mekalanos , J.J. ( 1989 ) A two-component regulatory system ( phoP phoQ ) controls Salmonella typhimurium virulence . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 86 , 5054 -- 5058 . 
[ 52 ] Groisman , E.A. ( 2001 ) The pleiotropic two-component regulatory system PhoP -- PhoQ . 
J. Bacteriol . 
183 , 1835 -- 1842 . 
[ 53 ] Chamnongpol , S. , Cromie , M. and Groisman , E.A. ( 2003 ) Mg 2 + sensing by the Mg sensor PhoQ of Salmonella enterica . 
J. Mol . 
2 + Biol . 
325 , 795 -- 807 . 
[ 54 ] Regelmann , A.G. , Lesley , J.A. , Mott , C. , Stokes , L. and Waldburger , C.D. ( 2002 ) Mutational analysis of the Esche ¬ 
richia coli PhoQ sensor kinase : differences with the Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium PhoQ protein and in the mechanism of Mg and Ca sensing . 
J. Bacteriol . 
184 , 2 + 2 + 5468 -- 5478 . 
[ 55 ] Adams , P. , Fowler , R. , Kinsella , N. , Howell , G. , Farris , M. , Coote , P. and O Connor , C.D. ( 2001 ) Proteomic detection of PhoPQ - and acid-mediated repression of Salmonella motility . 
Proteomics 1 , 597 -- 607 . 
[ 56 ] Behlau , I. and Miller , S.I. ( 1993 ) A PhoP-repressed gene 
promotes Salmonella typhimurium invasion of epithelial cells . 
J. Bacteriol . 
175 , 4475 -- 4484 . 
[ 57 ] Pegues , D.A. , Hantman , M.J. , Behlau , I. and Miller , S.I. ( 1995 ) PhoP/PhoQ transcriptional repression of Salmonella typhimu-rium invasion genes : evidence for a role in protein secretion . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
17 , 169 -- 181 . 
[ 58 ] Gunn , J.S. , Ryan , S.S. , Van Velkinburgh , J.C. , Ernst , R.K. and Miller , S.I. ( 2000 ) Genetic and functional analysis of a PmrA -- PmrB-regulated locus necessary for lipopolysaccharide modiﬁ ¬ 
cation , antimicrobial peptide resistance , and oral virulence of Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
68 , 6139 -- 6146 . 
[ 59 ] Belden , W.J. and Miller , S.I. ( 1994 ) Further characterization of the PhoP regulon : identiﬁcation of new PhoP-activated virulence loci . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
62 , 5095 -- 5101 . 
[ 60 ] Gunn , J.S. , Belden , W.J. and Miller , S.I. ( 1998 ) Identiﬁcation of PhoP -- PhoQ activated genes within a duplicated region of the Salmonella typhimurium chromosome . 
Microb . 
Pathog . 
25 , 77 -- 
[ 63 ] Groisman , E.A. , Kayser , J. and Soncini , F.C. ( 1997 ) Regulation of polymyxin resistance and adaptation to low-Mg environ-2 + ments . 
J. Bacteriol . 
179 , 7040 -- 7045 . 
[ 64 ] Deiwick , J. , Nikolaus , T. , Erdogan , S. and Hensel , M. ( 1999 ) Environmental regulation of Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 gene expression . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
31 , 1759 -- 1773 . 
[ 65 ] Beuzon , C.R. , Unsworth , K.E. and Holden , D.W. ( 2001 ) In vivo genetic analysis indicates that PhoP -- PhoQ and the Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 type III secretion system contribute 
expression of the major outer membrane matrix porin proteins of Escherichia coli K-12 . 
J. Bacteriol . 
147 , 255 -- 258 . 
[ 68 ] Hsing , W. and Silhavy , T.J. ( 1997 ) Function of conserved histidine-243 in phosphatase activity of EnvZ , the sensor for porin osmoregulation in Escherichia coli . 
J. Bacteriol . 
179 , 3729 -- 3735 . 
[ 69 ] Sato , M. , Machida , K. , Arikado , E. , Saito , H. , Kakegawa , T. and Kobayashi , H. ( 2000 ) Expression of outer membrane proteins in Escherichia coli growing at acid pH. Appl . 
Environ . 
[ 72 ] Feng , X. , Oropeza , R. and Kenney , L.J. ( 2003 ) Dual regulation by phospho-OmpR of ssrA/B gene expression in Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
48 , 1131 -- 1143 . 
[ 73 ] Lee , A.K. , Detweiler , C.S. and Falkow , S. ( 2000 ) OmpR regulates the two-component system SsrA -- ssrB in Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 . 
J. Bacteriol . 
182 , 771 -- 781 . 
[ 74 ] Merrell , D.S. , Butler , S.M. , Qadri , F. , Dolganov , N.A. , Alam , A. , Cohen , M.B. , Calderwood , S.B. , Schoolnik , G.K. and Camilli , A. ( 2002 ) Host-induced epidemic spread of the cholera 
[ 75 ] Xu , Q. , Dziejman , M. and Mekalanos , J.J. ( 2003 ) Determination of the transcriptome of Vibrio cholerae during intraintestinal growth and midexponential phase in vitro . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 100 , 1286 -- 1291 . 
[ 76 ] Jenkins , D.E. , Auger , E.A. and Matin , A. ( 1991 ) Role of RpoH , a heat shock regulator protein , in Escherichia coli carbon starvation protein synthesis and survival . 
J. Bacteriol . 
173 , 1992 -- 1996 . 
[ 80 ] Takaya , A. , Tomoyasu , T. , Matsui , H. and Yamamoto , T. ( 2004 ) The DnaK/DnaJ chaperone machinery of Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium is essential for invasion of epithelial cells and survival within macrophages , leading to systemic infection . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
72 , 1364 -- 1373 . 
[ 81 ] Tomoyasu , T. , Takaya , A. , Sasaki , T. , Nagase , T. , Kikuno , R. , Morioka , M. and Yamamoto , T. ( 2003 ) A new heat shock gene , AgsA , which encodes a small chaperone involved in suppressing 
protein aggregation in Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
185 , 6331 -- 6339 . 
[ 82 ] Pallen , M.J. and Wren , B.W. ( 1997 ) The HtrA family of serine proteases . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
26 , 209 -- 221 . 
[ 83 ] Thomsen , L.E. , Olsen , J.E. , Foster , J.W. and Ingmer , H. ( 2002 ) ClpP is involved in the stress response and degradation of misfolded proteins in Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium . 
Microbiology 148 , 2727 -- 2733 . 
[ 84 ] Chatﬁeld , S.N. , Strahan , K. , Pickard , D. , Charles , I.G. , 
[ 88 ] Humphreys , S. , Stevenson , A. , Bacon , A. , Weinhardt , A.B. and Roberts , M. ( 1999 ) The alternative sigma factor , rE , is critically important for the virulence of Salmonella typhimurium . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
67 , 1560 -- 1568 . 
[ 89 ] Testerman , T.L. , Vazquez-Torres , A. , Xu , Y. , Jones-Carson , J. , Libby , S.J. and Fang , F.C. ( 2002 ) The alternative sigma factor rE controls antioxidant defences required for Salmonella virulence and stationary-phase survival . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
43 , 771 -- 
[ 90 ] Kenyon , W.J. , Sayers , D.G. , Humphreys , S. , Roberts , M. and Spector , M.P. ( 2002 ) The starvation-stress response of Salmo-nella enterica serovar typhimurium requires rE - , but not CpxRregulated extracytoplasmic functions . 
Microbiology 148 , 113 -- 122 . 
[ 91 ] Sutherland , L. , Cairney , J. , Elmore , M.J. , Booth , I.R. and Higgins , C.F. ( 1986 ) Osmotic regulation of transcription : induction of the proU betaine transport gene is dependent on 
accumulation of intracellular potassium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
168 , 805 -- 814 . 
[ 92 ] Csonka , L.N. ( 1988 ) Regulation of cytoplasmic proline levels in Salmonella typhimurium : effect of osmotic stress on synthesis , degradation , and cellular retention of proline . 
J. Bacteriol . 
170 , 2374 -- 2378 . 
[ 93 ] Csonka , L.N. , Ikeda , T.P. , Fletcher , S.A. and Kustu , S. ( 1994 ) The accumulation of glutamate is necessary for optimal growth of Salmonella typhimurium in media of high 
osmolality but not induction of the proU operon . 
J. Bacteriol . 
176 , 6324 -- 6333 . 
[ 94 ] Yan , D. , Ikeda , T.P. , Shauger , A.E. and Kustu , S. ( 1996 ) Glutamate is required to maintain the steady-state potassium pool in Salmonella typhimurium . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 93 , 6527 -- 6531 . 
[ 95 ] Howells , A.M. , Bullifent , H.L. , Dhaliwal , K. , Grifin , K. , Garcia , d.C. , Frith , G. , Tunnacliffe , A. and Titball , R.W. ( 2002 ) Role of trehalose biosynthesis in environmental survival 
modiﬁcations by Salmonella typhimurium virulence genes phoP -- phoQ . 
Science 276 , 250 -- 253 . 
[ 102 ] Chai , T.J. and Foulds , J. ( 1977 ) Escherichia coli K-12 tolF mutants : alterations in protein composition of the outer membrane . 
J. Bacteriol . 
130 , 781 -- 786 . 
[ 103 ] Foulds , J. and Chai , T.J. ( 1978 ) New major outer membrane proteins found in an Escherichia coli tolF mutant resistant to bacteriophage TuIb . 
J. Bacteriol . 
133 , 1478 -- 1483 . 
[ 104 ] Heilpern , A.J. and Waldor , M.K. ( 2000 ) CTXphi infection of 
Vibrio cholerae requires the tolQRA gene products . 
J. Bacteriol . 
182 , 1739 -- 1747 . 
[ 105 ] Lazzaroni , J.C. , Germon , P. , Ray , M.C. and Vianney , A. ( 1999 ) The Tol proteins of Escherichia coli and their involvement in the uptake of biomolecules and outer membrane stability . 
FEMS Microbiol . 
Lett . 
177 , 191 -- 197 . 
[ 106 ] Levengood , S.K. , Beyer Jr. , W.F. and Webster , R.E. ( 1991 ) TolA : a membrane protein involved in colicin uptake contains an extended helical region . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 88 , 5939 -- 
[ 107 ] Prouty , A.M. , Brodsky , I.E. , Falkow , S. and Gunn , J.S. ( 2004 ) Bile-salt-mediated induction of antimicrobial and bile resistance in Salmonella typhimurium . 
Microbiology 150 , 775 -- 783 . 
[ 108 ] Prouty , A.M. and Gunn , J.S. ( 2000 ) Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium invasion is repressed in the presence of bile . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
68 , 6763 -- 6769 . 
[ 109 ] Prouty , A.M. and Gunn , J.S. ( 2003 ) Comparative analysis 
of Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium bioﬁlm formation on gallstones and on glass . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
71 , 7154 -- 7158 . 
[ 110 ] Prouty , A.M. , Schwesinger , W.H. and Gunn , J.S. ( 2002 ) Bioﬁlm formation and interaction with the surfaces of gallstones by Salmonella spp . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
70 , 2640 -- 2649 . 
[ 111 ] Barrow , P.A. ( 1989 ) Further observations on the effect of feeding diets containing avoparcin on the excretion of Salmonellas by experimentally infected chickens . 
Epidemiol . 
Infect . 
102 , 239 -- 
[ 112 ] Unden , G. , Becker , S. , Bongaerts , J. , Holighaus , G. , Schirawski , J. and Six , S. ( 1995 ) O2-sensing and O2-dependent gene regulation in facultatively anaerobic bacteria . 
Arch . 
Microbiol . 
164 , 81 -- 90 . 
[ 113 ] Georgellis , D. , Kwon , O. and Lin , E.C. ( 2001 ) Quinones as the redox signal for the arc two-component system of bacteria . 
Science 292 , 2314 -- 2316 . 
[ 114 ] Malpica , R. , Franco , B. , Rodriguez , C. , Kwon , O. and Georgellis , D. ( 2004 ) Identiﬁcation of a quinone-sensitive redox switch in the ArcB sensor kinase . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 101 , 13318 -- 13323 . 
[ 115 ] Alexeeva , S. , Hellingwerf , K.J. and Teixeira de Mattos , M.J. ( 2003 ) Requirement of ArcA for redox regulation in Escherichia 
coli under microaerobic but not anaerobic or aerobic conditions . 
J. Bacteriol . 
185 , 204 -- 209 . 
[ 116 ] Nystrom , T. , Larsson , C. and Gustafsson , L. ( 1996 ) Bacterial defense against aging : role of the Escherichia coli ArcA regulator in gene expression , readjusted energy ﬂux and survival during stasis . 
EMBO J. 15 , 3219 -- 3228 . 
[ 117 ] Ailion , M. , Bobik , T.A. and Roth , J.R. ( 1993 ) Two global regulatory systems ( Crp and Arc ) control the cobalamin 
[ 125 ] Lombardo , M.J. , Bagga , D. and Miller , C.G. ( 1991 ) Mutations in rpoA affect expression of anaerobically regulated genes in Salmonella typhimurium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
173 , 7511 -- 7518 . 
[ 126 ] Wei , Y. and Miller , C.G. ( 1999 ) Characterization of a group of anaerobically induced , fnr-dependent genes of Salmonella typhimurium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
181 , 6092 -- 6097 . 
[ 127 ] Lombardo , M.J. , Lee , A.A. , Knox , T.M. and Miller , C.G. ( 1997 ) Regulation of the Salmonella typhimurium pepT gene by cyclic 
AMP receptor protein ( CRP ) and FNR acting at a hybrid CRP-FNR site . 
J. Bacteriol . 
179 , 1909 -- 1917 . 
[ 128 ] Santiviago , C.A. , Toro , C.S. , Hidalgo , A.A. , Youderian , P. and Mora , G.C. ( 2003 ) Global regulation of the Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium major porin , OmpD . 
J. Bacteriol . 
185 , 5901 -- 5905 . 
[ 129 ] Kim , C.C. , Monack , D. and Falkow , S. ( 2003 ) Modulation of virulence by two acidiﬁed nitrite-responsive loci of Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
71 , 
[ 130 ] Lu , S. , Killoran , P.B. , Fang , F.C. and Riley , L.W. ( 2002 ) The global regulator ArcA controls resistance to reactive nitrogen and oxygen intermediates in Salmonella enterica serovar enteritidis . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
70 , 451 -- 461 . 
[ 131 ] Rychlik , I. , Martin , G. , Methner , U. , Lovell , M. , Cardova , L. , Sebkova , A. , Sevcik , M. , Damborsky , J. and Barrow , P.A. ( 2002 ) Identiﬁcation of Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium genes associated with growth suppression in stationary-phase 
nutrient broth cultures and in the chicken intestine . 
Arch . 
Microbiol . 
178 , 411 -- 420 . 
[ 132 ] Contreras , I. , Toro , C.S. , Troncoso , G. and Mora , G.C. ( 1997 ) Salmonella typhi mutants defective in anaerobic respiration are impaired in their ability to replicate within epithelial cells . 
Microbiology 143 , 2665 -- 2672 . 
[ 133 ] Barrow , P.A. , Lovell , M.A. and Barber , L.Z. ( 1996 ) Growth suppression in early-stationary-phase nutrient broth cultures of Salmonella typhimurium and Escherichia coli is genus speciﬁc and not regulated by rS . 
J. Bacteriol . 
178 , 3072 -- 3076 . 
[ 134 ] Zambrano , M.M. and Kolter , R. ( 1993 ) Escherichia coli mutants lacking NADH dehydrogenase I have a competitive disadvantage in stationary phase . 
J. Bacteriol . 
175 , 5642 -- 5647 . 
metabolism are involved in growth suppression in Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium in vitro , without inﬂuencing colonisation inhibition in the chicken in vivo . 
Vet . 
Microbiol . 
97 , 191 -- 199 . 
[ 138 ] Nogrady , N. , Imre , A. , Rychlik , I. , Barrow , P.A. and Nagy , B. ( 2003 ) Growth and colonization suppression of Salmonella enterica serovar Hadar in vitro and in vivo . 
FEMS Microbiol . 
Lett . 
218 , 127 -- 133 . 
[ 139 ] Tedin , K. and Norel , F. ( 2001 ) Comparison of DrelA strains 
of Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica serovar typhimu-rium suggests a role for ppGpp in attenuation regulation of branched-chain amino acid biosynthesis . 
J. Bacteriol . 
183 , 6184 -- 6196 . 
[ 140 ] Gentry , D.R. , Hernandez , V.J. , Nguyen , L.H. , Jensen , D.B. and Cashel , M. ( 1993 ) Synthesis of the stationary-phase sigma factor rS is positively regulated by ppGpp . 
J. Bacteriol . 
175 , 7982 -- 7989 . 
[ 141 ] Pizarro-Cerda , J. and Tedin , K. ( 2004 ) The bacterial signal 
molecule , ppGpp , regulates Salmonella virulence gene expression . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
52 , 1827 -- 1844 . 
[ 142 ] Song , M. , Kim , H.J. , Kim , E.Y. , Shin , M. , Lee , H.C. , Hong , Y. , Rhee , J.H. , Yoon , H. , Ryu , S. , Lim , S. and Choy , H.E. ( 2004 ) ppGpp-dependent stationary phase induction of genes on Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
279 , 34183 -- 34190 . 
[ 143 ] Arnold , C.N. , McElhanon , J. , Lee , A. , Leonhart , R. and Siegele , D.A. ( 2001 ) Global analysis of Escherichia coli gene expression 
during the acetate-induced acid tolerance response . 
J. Bacteriol . 
183 , 2178 -- 2186 . 
[ 144 ] McHan , F. and Shotts , E.B. ( 1993 ) Effect of short-chain fatty acids on the growth of Salmonella typhimurium in an in vitro system . 
Avian Dis . 
37 , 396 -- 398 . 
[ 145 ] Durant , J.A. , Lowry , V.K. , Nisbet , D.J. , Stanker , L.H. , Corrier , D.E. and Ricke , S.C. ( 1999 ) Short-chain fatty acids affect cell-association and invasion of HEp-2 cells by Salmonella typhimu-rium . 
J. Environ . 
Sci . 
Health B 34 , 1083 -- 1099 . 
[ 146 ] Lawhon , S.D. , Maurer , R. , Suyemoto , M. and Altier , C. ( 2002 ) Intestinal short-chain fatty acids alter Salmonella typhimurium invasion gene expression and virulence through BarA/SirA . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
46 , 1451 -- 1464 . 
[ 147 ] Van Immerseel , F. , De Buck , J. , Pasmans , F. , Velge , P. , Bottreau , E. , Fievez , V. , Haesebrouck , F. and Ducatelle , R. ( 2003 ) Invasion of Salmonella enteritidis in avian intestinal epithelial cells in vitro is inﬂuenced by short-chain fatty acids . 
Int . 
J. Food Microbiol . 
85 , 237 -- 248 . 
[ 148 ] Van Immerseel , F. , Fievez , V. , De Buck , J. , Pasmans , F. , Martel , A. , Haesebrouck , F. and Ducatelle , R. ( 2004 ) Microencapsulated short-chain fatty acids in feed modify colonization and invasion early after infection with Salmonella enteritidis in young chickens . 
Poult . 
Sci . 
83 , 69 -- 74 . 
[ 149 ] Choi , H.J. , Cheigh , C.I. , Kim , S.B. and Pyun , Y.R. ( 2000 ) Production of a nisin-like bacteriocin by Lactococcus lactis subsp . 
lactis A164 isolated from Kimchi . 
J. Appl . 
Microbiol . 
88 , 563 -- 571 . 
[ 150 ] Portrait , V. , Gendron-Gaillard , S. , Cottenceau , G. and Pons , A.M. ( 1999 ) Inhibition of pathogenic Salmonella enteritidis growth mediated by Escherichia coli microcin J25 producing strains . 
Can . 
J. Microbiol . 
45 , 988 -- 994 
[ 154 ] Smith , I.M. , Hill , R. and Brothwell , E. ( 1980 ) The effects of added dietary iron in various forms on mice inoculated with Salmonella typhimurium . 
Res . 
Vet . 
Sci . 
28 , 161 -- 167 . 
[ 155 ] Carlson , S.A. , Frana , T.S. and Grifith , R.W. ( 2001 ) Antibiotic resistance in Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium exposed to microcin-producing Escherichia coli . 
Appl . 
Environ . 
Microbiol . 
67 , 3763 -- 3766 . 
[ 156 ] Destoumieux-Garzon , D. , Thomas , X. , Santamaria , M. , Gou ¬ 
lard , C. , Barthelemy , M. , Boscher , B. , Bessin , Y. , Molle , G. , Pons , A.M. , Letellier , L. , Peduzzi , J. and Rebuffat , S. ( 2003 ) Microcin E492 antibacterial activity : evidence for a TonB-dependent inner membrane permeabilization on Escherichia coli . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
49 , 1031 -- 1041 . 
[ 157 ] Patzer , S.I. , Baquero , M.R. , Bravo , D. , Moreno , F. and Hantke , K. ( 2003 ) The colicin G , H and X determinants encode microcins M and H47 , which might utilize the catecholate siderophore receptors FepA , Cir , Fiu and IroN . 
Microbiology 149 , 2557 -- 
[ 158 ] Vincent , P.A. , Delgado , M.A. , Farias , R.N. and Salomon , R.A. ( 2004 ) Inhibition of Salmonella enterica serovars by microcin J25 . 
FEMS Microbiol . 
Lett . 
236 , 103 -- 107 . 
[ 159 ] Gray , K.M. and Garey , J.R. ( 2001 ) The evolution of bacterial LuxI and LuxR quorum sensing regulators . 
Microbiology 147 , 2379 -- 2387 . 
[ 160 ] Wang , X.D. , de Boer , P.A. and Rothﬁeld , L.I. ( 1991 ) A factor that positively regulates cell division by activating transcription 
of the major cluster of essential cell division genes of Escherichia coli . 
EMBO J. 10 , 3363 -- 3372 . 
[ 161 ] Sitnikov , D.M. , Schineller , J.B. and Baldwin , T.O. ( 1996 ) Control of cell division in Escherichia coli : regulation of transcription of ftsQA involves both rpoS and SdiAmediated autoinduction . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 93 , 336 -- 341 . 
[ 162 ] Garcia-Lara , J. , Shang , L.H. and Rothﬁeld , L.I. ( 1996 ) An extracellular factor regulates expression of sdiA , a transcriptional 
activator of cell division genes in Escherichia coli . 
J. Bacteriol . 
178 , 2742 -- 2748 . 
[ 163 ] Kanamaru , K. , Kanamaru , K. , Tatsuno , I. , Tobe , T. and Sasakawa , C. ( 2000 ) SdiA , an Escherichia coli homologue of quorum-sensing regulators , controls the expression of virulence factors in enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157 : H7 . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
38 , 805 -- 816 . 
[ 164 ] Rahmati , S. , Yang , S. , Davidson , A.L. and Zechiedrich , E.L. ( 2002 ) Control of the AcrAB multidrug eﬄux pump by quorum ¬ 
[ 165 ] Wei , Y. , Vollmer , A.C. and LaRossa , R.A. ( 2001 ) In vivo titration of mitomycin C action by four Escherichia coli genomic regions on multicopy plasmids . 
J. Bacteriol . 
183 , 2259 -- 2264 . 
[ 166 ] Wei , Y. , Lee , J.M. , Smulski , D.R. and LaRossa , R.A. ( 2001 ) Global impact of sdiA ampliﬁcation revealed by comprehensive gene expression proﬁling of Escherichia coli . 
J. Bacteriol . 
183 , 2265 -- 2272 . 
[ 167 ] Ahmer , B.M. , van Reeuwijk , J. , Timmers , C.D. , Valentine , P.J. 
[ 170 ] Michael , B. , Smith , J.N. , Swift , S. , Heffron , F. and Ahmer , B.M. ( 2001 ) SdiA of Salmonella enterica is a LuxR homolog that detects mixed microbial communities . 
J. Bacteriol . 
183 , 5733 -- 5742 . 
[ 171 ] Smith , J.N. and Ahmer , B.M. ( 2003 ) Detection of other microbial species by Salmonella : expression of the SdiA regulon . 
J. Bacteriol . 
185 , 1357 -- 1366 . 
[ 172 ] Rychlik , I. and Gregorova , D. ( 2004 ) sdiA in Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium is induced at low pH. ASM Conference on 
Cell -- Cell Communication in Bacteria , Banff , Canada , pp. 32 -- 33 . . 
[ 173 ] Bassler , B.L. , Greenberg , E.P. and Stevens , A.M. ( 1997 ) Cross-species induction of luminescence in the quorum-sensing bacte-rium Vibrio harveyi . 
J. Bacteriol . 
179 , 4043 -- 4045 . 
[ 174 ] Surette , M.G. and Bassler , B.L. ( 1998 ) Quorum sensing in Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 95 , 7046 -- 7050 . 
[ 175 ] Surette , M.G. , Miller , M.B. and Bassler , B.L. ( 1999 ) Quorum 
sensing in Escherichia coli , Salmonella typhimurium , and Vibrio harveyi : a new family of genes responsible for autoinducer production . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 96 , 1639 -- 1644 . 
[ 176 ] DeLisa , M.P. , Valdes , J.J. and Bentley , W.E. ( 2001 ) Mapping stress-induced changes in autoinducer AI-2 production in chemostat-cultivated Escherichia coli K-12 . 
J. Bacteriol . 
183 , 2918 -- 2928 . 
[ 177 ] Surette , M.G. and Bassler , B.L. ( 1999 ) Regulation of autoinducer production in Salmonella typhimurium . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
[ 178 ] Sperandio , V. , Mellies , J.L. , Nguyen , W. , Shin , S. and Kaper , J.B. ( 1999 ) Quorum sensing controls expression of the type III secretion gene transcription and protein secretion in enterohemorrhagic and enteropathogenic Escherichia coli . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 96 , 15196 -- 15201 . 
[ 179 ] Sperandio , V. , Torres , A.G. , Giron , J.A. and Kaper , J.B. ( 2001 ) Quorum sensing is a global regulatory mechanism in enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157 : H7 . 
J. Bacteriol . 
183 , 5187 -- 
responsive transcriptional regulators . 
J. Bacteriol . 
176 , 269 -- 275 . 
[ 183 ] Zhu , J. , Miller , M.B. , Vance , R.E. , Dziejman , M. , Bassler , B.L. and Mekalanos , J.J. ( 2002 ) Quorum-sensing regulators control virulence gene expression in Vibrio cholerae . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 99 , 3129 -- 3134 . 
[ 184 ] Fahlen , T.F. , Wilson , R.L. , Boddicker , J.D. and Jones , B.D. ( 2001 ) Hha is a negative modulator of transcription of hilA , the Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium invasion gene transcriptional activator . 
J. Bacteriol . 
183 , 6620 -- 6629 . 
[ 185 ] DeLisa , M.P. , Wu , C.F. , Wang , L. , Valdes , J.J. and Bentley , W.E. ( 2001 ) DNA microarray-based identiﬁcation of genes controlled by autoinducer 2-stimulated quorum sensing in Escherichia coli . 
J. Bacteriol . 
183 , 5239 -- 5247 
[ 186 ] Bassler , B.L. , Wright , M. and Silverman , M.R. ( 1994 ) Multiple signalling systems controlling expression of luminescence in Vibrio harveyi : sequence and function of genes encoding a second sensory pathway . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
13 , 273 -- 286 . 
[ 187 ] Mok , K.C. , Wingreen , N.S. and Bassler , B.L. ( 2003 ) Vibrio harveyi quorum sensing : a coincidence detector for two autoinducers controls gene expression . 
EMBO J. 22 , 870 -- 881 . 
[ 188 ] Frees , D. , Vogensen , F.K. and Ingmer , H. ( 2003 ) Identiﬁcation of proteins induced at low pH in Lactococcus lactis . 
Int . 
J. Food 
[ 189 ] Stancik , L.M. , Stancik , D.M. , Schmidt , B. , Barnhart , D.M. , Yoncheva , Y.N. and Slonczewski , J.L. ( 2002 ) pH-dependent expression of periplasmic proteins and amino acid catabolism in Escherichia coli . 
J. Bacteriol . 
184 , 4246 -- 4258 . 
[ 190 ] Dunlap , P.V. ( 1992 ) Iron control of the Vibrio ﬁscheri luminescence system in Escherichia coli . 
Arch . 
Microbiol . 
157 , 235 -- 241 . 
[ 191 ] Dunlap , P.V. and Kuo , A. ( 1992 ) Cell density-dependent modulation of the Vibrio ﬁscheri luminescence system in the 
absence of autoinducer and LuxR protein . 
J. Bacteriol . 
174 , 2440 -- 2448 . 
[ 192 ] Canny , G. , Levy , O. , Furuta , G.T. , Narravula-Alipati , S. , Sisson , R.B. , Serhan , C.N. and Colgan , S.P. ( 2002 ) Lipid mediator-induced expression of bactericidal/permeabilityincreasing protein ( BPI ) in human mucosal epithelia . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 99 , 3902 -- 3907 . 
[ 193 ] Bals , R. and Wilson , J.M. ( 2003 ) Cathelicidins -- a family of multifunctional antimicrobial peptides . 
Cell Mol . 
Life Sci . 
60 , 
[ 194 ] Hancock , R.E. and Scott , M.G. ( 2000 ) The role of antimicrobial peptides in animal defenses . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 97 , 8856 -- 8861 . 
[ 195 ] Wu , H. , Zhang , G. , Minton , J.E. , Ross , C.R. and Blecha , F. ( 2000 ) Regulation of cathelicidin gene expression : induction by lipopoly-saccharide , interleukin-6 , retinoic acid , and Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium infection . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
68 , 5552 -- 5558 . 
[ 196 ] Guo , L. , Lim , K.B. , Poduje , C.M. , Daniel , M. , Gunn , J.S. , 
Hackett , M. and Miller , S.I. ( 1998 ) Lipid A acylation and bacterial resistance against vertebrate antimicrobial peptides . 
Cell 95 , 189 -- 198 . 
[ 197 ] Zhang , L. , Rozek , A. and Hancock , R.E. ( 2001 ) Interaction of cationic antimicrobial peptides with model membranes . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
276 , 35714 -- 35722 . 
[ 198 ] Scott , M.G. , Yan , H. and Hancock , R.E. ( 1999 ) Biological properties of structurally related alpha-helical cationic antimicrobial peptides . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
67 , 2005 -- 2009 . 
[ 199 ] Gunn , J.S. , Lim , K.B. , Krueger , J. , Kim , K. , Guo , L. , Hackett , M. and Miller , S.I. ( 1998 ) PmrA -- PmrB-regulated genes necessary for 4-aminoarabinose lipid A modiﬁcation and polymyxin resistance . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
27 , 1171 -- 1182 . 
[ 200 ] Guina , T. , Yi , E.C. , Wang , H. , Hackett , M. and Miller , S.I. ( 2000 ) A PhoP-regulated outer membrane protease of Salmo-nella enterica serovar typhimurium promotes resistance to alphahelical antimicrobial peptides . 
J. Bacteriol . 
182 , 4077 -- 4086 . 
[ 201 ] Trent , M.S. , Pabich , W. , Raetz , C.R. and Miller , S.I. ( 2001 ) A 
[ 202 ] Gunn , J.S. and Miller , S.I. ( 1996 ) PhoP -- PhoQ activates transcription of pmrAB , encoding a two-component regulatory system involved in Salmonella typhimurium antimicrobial peptide resistance . 
J. Bacteriol . 
178 , 6857 -- 6864 . 
[ 203 ] Mouslim , C. and Groisman , E.A. ( 2003 ) Control of the Salmonella ugd gene by three two-component regulatory systems . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
47 , 335 -- 344 . 
[ 204 ] McLeod , G.I. and Spector , M.P. ( 1996 ) Starvation - and Stationary-phase-induced resistance to the antimicrobial peptide polymyxin B in Salmonella typhimurium is RpoS ( rS ) independent and occurs through both phoP-dependent and - independent pathways . 
J. Bacteriol . 
178 , 3683 -- 3688 . 
[ 205 ] Groisman , E.A. , Parra-Lopez , C. , Salcedo , M. , Lipps , C.J. and Heffron , F. ( 1992 ) Resistance to host antimicrobial peptides is 
necessary for Salmonella virulence . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 89 , 11939 -- 11943 . 
[ 206 ] Bader , M.W. , Navarre , W.W. , Shiau , W. , Nikaido , H. , Frye , J.G. , McClelland , M. , Fang , F.C. and Miller , S.I. ( 2003 ) Regulation of Salmonella typhimurium virulence gene expression by cationic antimicrobial peptides . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
50 , 219 -- 230 . 
[ 207 ] Barker , H.C. , Kinsella , N. , Jaspe , A. , Friedrich , T. and O Connor , C.D. ( 2000 ) Formate protects stationary-phase 
Escherichia coli and Salmonella cells from killing by a cationic antimicrobial peptide . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
35 , 1518 -- 1529 . 
[ 208 ] Deiwick , J. and Hensel , M. ( 1999 ) Regulation of virulence genes by environmental signals in Salmonella typhimurium . 
Electro-phoresis 20 , 813 -- 817 . 
[ 209 ] Krishnakumar , R. , Craig , M. , Imlay , J.A. and Slauch , J.M. ( 2004 ) Differences in enzymatic properties allow SodCI but not SodCII to contribute to virulence in Salmonella enterica 
serovar typhimurium strain 14028 . 
J. Bacteriol . 
186 , 5230 -- 5238 . 
[ 210 ] Uzzau , S. , Bossi , L. and Figueroa-Bossi , N. ( 2002 ) Differential accumulation of Salmonella [ Cu , Zn ] superoxide dismutases SodCI and SodCII in intracellular bacteria : correlation with their relative contribution to pathogenicity . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
46 , 147 -- 156 . 
[ 211 ] Eriksson , S. , Lucchini , S. , Thompson , A. , Rhen , M. and Hinton , J.C. ( 2003 ) Unravelling the biology of macrophage infection by 
gene expression proﬁling of intracellular Salmonella enterica . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
47 , 103 -- 118 . 
[ 212 ] Papp-Szabo , E. , Firtel , M. and Josephy , P.D. ( 1994 ) Comparison of the sensitivities of Salmonella typhimurium oxyR and katG mutants to killing by human neutrophils . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
62 , 2662 -- 2668 . 
[ 213 ] Fang , F.C. , Vazquez-Torres , A. and Xu , Y. ( 1997 ) The transcriptional regulator SoxS is required for resistance of Salmonella typhimurium to paraquat but not for virulence in 
[ 214 ] Pomposiello , P.J. and Demple , B. ( 2000 ) Identiﬁcation of SoxSregulated genes in Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
182 , 23 -- 29 . 
[ 215 ] Miller , S.I. , Loomis , W.P. , Alpuche-Aranda , C. , Behlau , I. and Hohmann , E. ( 1993 ) The PhoP virulence regulon and live oral Salmonella vaccines . 
Vaccine 11 , 122 -- 125