Microbes and Infection 7 ( 2005 ) 1296 -- 1304 
www.elsevier.com/locate/micinf 
Original article 
Inducible serum resistance in Salmonella typhimurium is dependent o wzzfepE-regulated very long O antigen chains 
n
Gerald L. Murray a , Stephen R. Attridge a , b , Renato Morona a , * 
a Australian Bacterial Pathogenesis Program , Discipline of Microbiology and Immunology , School of Molecular and Biomedical Science , The University of Adelaide , Adelaide 5005 , Australia b Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology , Göteborg University , Box 435,40530 Göteborg , Sweden 
Received 20 January 2005 ; accepted 25 April 2005 
Available online 09 June 2005 
Abstract 
Salmonella typhimurium possesses two wzz genes conferring long ( wzzST ) and very long ( wzzfepE ) lipopolysaccharide O antigen modal chain lengths . 
While the long O antigen modal length was essential for complement resistance , the very long modal length was found to have a minor role . 
However , when grown in the presence of serum , S. typhimurium demonstrated a wzzfepE-dependent increase in the density of very long O antigen chains , resulting in a signiﬁcant increase in serum resistance . 
Similar phenotypic changes were observed after growth under iron-limiting conditions , though iron limitation is unlikely to be the sole signalling mechanism behind the changes induced in serum . 
A wzzfepE : : lacZ promoter fusion was used to determine that regulation of wzzfepE transcription is unlikely to be the mechanism behind the variation in O antigen length . 
Since systemic infection occurs in a small but signiﬁcant percentage of human non-typhoid salmonellosis , the phenomenon identiﬁed in this study may be signiﬁcant during the bacteraemic phase of infection . 
© 2005 Elsevier SAS . 
All rights reserved . 
Keywords: Salmonella typhimurium; Serum complement; Lipopolysaccharide; O antigen; Bacteraemia; Adaptation; wzzfepE
1. Introduction
Lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) is important in Salmonella virulence . 
LPS molecules are composed of lipid A ( endotoxin ) , an oligosaccharide core , and O antigen polysaccharide ( Oag ) . 
Oag is a polymer of O sugar repeat-units that extends outwards from the surface of the organism . 
Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium ( Salmonella typhimurium ) LPS is a wellrecognised defence against complement . 
Studies with Salmo-nella strains differing only in the sugar composition of the Oag repeat-units revealed a direct correlation between the degree of complement activation and susceptibility to phagocytosis , which was in turn inversely related to virulence [ 1 -- 3 ] . 
The length and density of Oag are also important for resistance to the bactericidal activity of complement [ 4 ] ( G.L.M , 
Abbreviations : GPS , guinea pig serum ; HIGPS , heat-inactivated guinea pig serum ; HIHS , heat-inactivated human serum ; LB , Luria Bertani medium ; LPS , lipopolysaccharide ; Oag , O antigen . 
* Corresponding author . 
Tel. : +61 8 8303 4151 ; fax : +61 8 8303 7532 . 
E-mail address : renato.morona@adelaide.edu.au ( R. Morona ) . 
1286-4579 / $ - see front matter © 2005 Elsevier SAS . 
All rights reserved . 
doi :10.1016 / j.micinf .2005.04.01 
S.R.A , and R.M. , unpublished data ) . 
Oag contributes to complement resistance by covering lipid A-core to prevent activation of the classical pathway [ 5 ] and by activating complement via the alternative pathway distant from the cell to prevent membrane attack complex insertion into the outer membrane [ 6 -- 8 ] . 
Wzz proteins control the length and density of Oag polymers by causing a clustering of Oag lengths around characteristic modal values . 
We recently showed that S. typhimu-rium possesses two Wzz proteins : WzzST confers a long modal range of 16 -- 35 repeat units ( long LPS ) and WzzfepE confers a very long modal range estimated to be > 100 repeat units ( very long LPS ) [ 9 ] . 
Modal length regulation of Oag by Wzz proteins is essential for S. typhimurium resistance to the complement cascade and for virulence in the mouse model of infection [ 9 ] . 
S. typhimurium encounters many different environments in vivo that stimulate expression of virulence factors to counter host defences [ 10 ] . 
One such environment is the blood ; in the mouse model of typhoid fever S. typhimurium causes an early , very transient bacteraemic phase , while the terminal stage of disease is characterised by S. typhimurium septicaemia ( reviewed in [ 11 ] ) . 
The human infection is normally a selflimiting gastroenteritis , however , 2 % of clinical S. typhimu-rium isolates are recovered from blood , with greater incidence in the elderly and young [ 12,13 ] . 
This study describes an adaptive mechanism whereby S. typhimurium responds to serum exposure by increased production of LPS with very long Oag modal length ; this altered LPS phenotype is associated with enhanced serum resistance . 
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Bacterial strains and culture conditions
Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are summarised in Table 1 . 
Bacteria were stored at -- 70 °C and cultured with aeration in Luria Bertani ( LB ; 0.5 % ( w/v ) NaCl , 0.5 % ( w/v ) Yeast Extract ( Difco ) , 1 % ( w/v ) Bacto Tryptone Peptone ( BD ) ) at 37 °C for 16 h. Viable counts were determined on LabLemco Nutrient Agar ( Oxoid ) . 
Where appropriate , media were supplemented with ampicillin ( 100 µg / ml ) , kanamycin ( 50 µg / ml ) or tetracycline ( 10 µg / ml ) . 
Ironlimiting medium was prepared by chelating LB with 100 µM 2,2 ′ - dipyridyl ( Sigma ) . 
Culture in serum was conducted in a 1 ml volume at 37 °C for 16 h with aeration in 1.5 ml reaction tubes . 
2.2. Molecular biology techniques and analysis of LPS by silver-stained SDS PAGE
Endonuclease restriction digests of DNA and DNA ligation were performed as recommended by the enzyme manu ¬ 
Strain Relevant characteristics C5 Wild type S. typhimurium facturer . 
LPS techniques were performed as described previously [ 9 ] . 
2.3. Source of complement
Sera prepared from ﬁve guinea pigs ( GPS ) and from four healthy humans were separately pooled and stored in ali-quots at -- 70 °C . 
For controls in bactericidal assays and use as a growth medium , serum was heat-inactivated by incubation at 56 °C for 30 min . 
2.4. Complement bactericidal assay
Sixteen hours broth cultures were subcultured 0.3 ml into 10 ml warmed LB medium ( in 20 ml narrow neck glass bottles ) and grown for 2 h. Bacteria were serially diluted in 1.5 ml reaction tubes ( based on OD ) to 6.6 × 104 600 cfu/ml ( 6.6 × 105 cfu/ml for 90 % GPS ) ( in PBS + 2 mM MgCl2 ) , GPS was added to 10 % or 90 % ( v/v ) ﬁnal concentration and mixtures incubated at 37 °C without agitation . 
Chloramphenicol ( Cm ) was added ( 25 µg / ml ) to prevent growth during the assay unless otherwise indicated . 
Viable counts were taken at 30 min intervals by plating on nutrient agar and expressed as a percentage of initial concentration ( % survival ) . 
Each strain was assayed a minimum of three times . 
In each assay bacteria grown under different conditions were in similar growth phase ( based on cfu/ml counts ) . 
Statistical signiﬁcance was analysed using a Student 's t-test ( two tailed , two-sample equal variance ; Microsoft Excel 2000 ) . 
2.5. Construction of a wzzfepE::lacZ promoter fusion
A lacZ-KmR fragment was cloned from pKOK6 .1 [ 17 ] into pCACTUS using BamHI to construct pCACTUS-lacZ-KmR . 
lacZ-KmR was subcloned as a PstI fragment from pCACTUS-lacZ-KmR into pUC18 to construct pUC18-lacZ-KmR to pick up additional restriction sites . 
This was then digested with SphI and partially digested with SmaI ( a second SmaI site is present in the KmR cassette ) . 
A 4.7 kb band was isolated and cloned into an SphI/HincII digested pWSK29-wzzfepE construct , creating a plasmid-borne wzzfepE : : lacZ promoter fusion ( pWSK29-wzzfepE : : lacZ-KmR ) replacing wzzfepE from the start codon . 
An ApaI/NotI digest was performed , cleaned by DNA precipitation , and mutants obtained using the k-Red mutagenesis system [ 16 ] by electroporation into competent C5 [ pKD46 ] cells . 
The fusion point was conﬁrmed by PCR and DNA sequencing , and the resulting strain named C5wzzfepE : : lacZ . 
Table 1 Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study 
Source/Reference Laboratory collection ( EX728 ) [ 9 ] 
LPS Oag phenotype Bimodal 
Very long ( > 100 repeat units ) Smooth , unregulated Long ( 16 -- 35 repeat units ) Long ( 16 -- 35 repeat units ) Very long ( > 100 repeat units ) 
C5DwzzST 
wzzST null mutant 
wzzST , wzzfepE null mutant wzzfepE null mutant 
[ 9 ] [ 9 ] [ 9 ] [ 9 ] 
C5Dw C5Dw C5Dw C5Dw 
zzSTDwzzfepE zzfepE 
SK29-wzzST ] SK29-wzzfepE ] 
zzSTDwzzfepE [ pW zzSTDwzzfepE [ pW 
L modal length complemented strain Very long modal length complemented strain 
C5phoP -- C5phoPc 
phoP null mutant 
[ 14 ] [ 14 ] 
C5 containing pho-24 mutation in phoQ wzzfepE promoter fusion Suicide vector containing sacB , CmR and orits lacZ-KmR subclone from pKOK6 .1 k Red mutagenesis plasmid Vector for construction of promoter fusions General cloning vector 
C5wzzfepE : : lacZ pCACTUS pCACTUS-lacZ-KmR pKD46 pKOK6 .1 pUC18 
This study [ 15 ] This study [ 16 ] [ 17 ] ; W. Lotz Genbank accession L09136 This study [ 9 ] This study [ 9 
lacZ-KmR subclone from pCACTUS-lacZ-KmR wzzfepE subclone wzzfepE promoter fusion wzzST PCR clone 
pUC18-lacZ-KmR pWSK29-wzzfepE 
pWSK29-wzzfepE : : lacZ-KmR pWSK29-wzzST 
2.6. b-Galactosidase assay
The b-galactosidase assay was conducted by the method of Miller [ 18 ] with modiﬁcation . 
In brief , 16 h cultures of bacteria were pelleted and resuspended in Z buffer in a ﬁnal volume of 1 ml . 
After measuring density by OD600 cells were permeabilised by the addition of 20 µl 0.1 % SDS and 40 µl chloroform followed by 10 s vigorous mixing . 
A 0.4 ml ali-quot was then taken and mixed with 120 µl 7 mg/ml ONPG then dispensed into wells of a microtitre tray . 
Samples were incubated at 28 °C with OD and OD measured at 2 min 420 550 intervals over a 3 h period ( Molecular Devices SpectraMax M2 Plate Reader ) . 
The number of arbitrary b-galactosidase units was determined as described previously [ 18 ] . 
The assay was repeated three times . 
Fig. 1 . 
Survival of S. typhimurium C5 and wzz mutants in 10 % GPS . 
Bacterial cultures were diluted in PBS supplemented with 2 mM MgCl2 contai-ning Cm . 
GPS was added to a ﬁnal concentration of 10 % ( v/v ) and mixtures incubated at 37 °C . 
Samples were taken at 30 min intervals for viable counts . 
Data points represent percentage survival ( mean ± S.D. , n = 3 assays ) . 
3. Results
3.1. The role of wzz genes in S. typhimurium serum resistance
A series of isogenic S. typhimurium wzz mutants created in our laboratory [ 9 ] ( Table 1 ) was subjected to a complement sensitivity assay in 10 % GPS over a 2 h period ( see Section 2 ) . 
While wild type C5 ( bimodal Oag length ) and C5DwzzfepE ( long Oag modal length ) were serum resistant with > 100 % survival , C5DwzzST ( very long Oag modal length ) and C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE ( smooth , unregulated LPS ) were signiﬁcantly sensitive with only 7 % and 0.3 % survival , respectively ( P < 0.01 , Student 's t-test ; Fig. 1 ) . 
A control ( C5DwzzST incubated in 10 % heat-inactivated guinea pig serum , HIGPS ) demonstrated > 100 % survival while complementation of C5DwzzST or C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE with wzzST ( pWSK29-wzzST ) conferred > 100 % serum resistance ( data not shown ) . 
When the serum concentration was increased to 90 % a similar outcome was observed . 
After 2 h incubation , C5 dem-onstrated an average of 96 % survival , signiﬁcantly different from C5DwzzST ( 1.6 % survival ) and C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE ( 0.6 % survival ) ( P < 0.001 , Student 's t-test ) . 
C5DwzzfepE still demonstrated a high average level of survival ( 75 % , P < 0.05 , Student 's t-test , when compared to C5DwzzST and C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE ) . 
This indicates that the Oag modal length conferred by wzzST is essential for serum resistance , while wzzfepE has a minor contribution to resistance under the conditions tested . 
Complementation of C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE with pWSK29-wzzfepE conferred strong regulation of Oag with signiﬁcantly more very long Oag LPS than that found in wild type C5 or in C5DwzzST due to increased gene dosage [ 9 ] . 
As a result of increased density of LPS with very long Oag , this strain also showed > 100 % survival in serum when assayed in 10 % or 90 % ﬁnal serum concentration ( data not shown ) . 
3.2. Induction of adaptive complement resistance in S. typhimurium C5DwzzST
In the above assay Cm was included as a reversible inhibi-tor of growth , to prevent exponential multiplication of complement-resistant bacteria . 
However , the inhibition of protein synthesis may preclude any adaptation that might normally occur in the presence of serum . 
When the assay was repeated without the inhibitor , as expected both C5 incubated in 10 % serum and C5DwzzST incubated in 10 % HIGPS ( control ) exhibited exponential growth ( Fig. 2 ) . 
C5DwzzfepE also showed exponential growth ( data not shown ) . 
C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE was still susceptible to killing ( approximately 12 % survival , compared to 0.3 % survival whe assayed in the presence of Cm ) , with higher survival under these conditions possibly due to bacterial multiplication offsetting the rate of killing . 
In contrast , C5Dwzz initially ST exhibited complement sensitivity over the ﬁrst 60 min , by which time bacterial survival had fallen to 43 % , followed by an exponential increase in bacterial numbers to 170 % at 240 min . 
This suggests that C5DwzzST actively adapts under exposure to serum to acquire a complement-resistant phenotype . 
Since C5Dwzz Dwzz did not demonstrate the same ST fepE adaptation , this process is dependent on wzz . 
fepE 
3.3. The effect of growth in heat-inactivated serum on LPS proﬁle
The apparent wzz - dependent acquisition of serum resisfepE tance suggested changes in LPS Oag length or density might have occurred as a result of serum exposure . 
To examine this possibility , strains were grown for 16 h in 1 ml 100 % heat-inactivated serum or LB , and the resulting LPS proﬁles examined by silver-stained SDS-PAGE . 
Similar results were obtained using either heat-inactivated human serum ( HIHS ) or HIGPS ; results from one experiment with the former are shown in Fig. 3 . 
Heat-inactivated serum-grown C5 ( lane 2 ) and C5DwzzST ( lane 4 ) showed increases in the amounts of LPS with very long Oag compared to LB-grown cultures ; staining intensities in this region of the gel were similar to that seen with C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE [ pWSK29-wzzfepE ] ( lane 
7 ) , which has a higher density of very long type Oag due to multiple copies of plasmid-borne wzzfepE [ 9 ] . 
In C5 the long modal range of LPS ( 16 -- 35 repeat units ) was unaffected . 
As expected , there was no increase in LPS with very long Oag in C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE grown in each condition ( lane 5 and 6 ) . 
3.4. The effect of growth in heat-inactivated serum on complement resistance in C5 and C5DwzzST
To determine if the changes in Oag proﬁle stimulated by serum exposure translate to serum resistance , 16 h cultures grown in 1 ml LB or 100 % HIGPS were analysed for complement sensitivity in 10 % serum ( Fig. 4 ) . 
It was notable that under these growth conditions strains showed an overall higher level of complement sensitivity than after harvest in log phase from LB cultures ( Fig. 1 ) , though the reason for this is unclear . 
Growth in 100 % HIGPS signiﬁcantly increased the complement resistance of C5 , from 60 % survival ( LBgrown ) to 86 % survival at 2 h ( P < 0.01 , Student 's t-test ) 
Fig. 2 . 
Survival of selected S. typhimurium C5 mutants in 10 % GPS or heat-inactivated GPS in the absence of a reversible growth inhibitor . 
Bacterial cultures were diluted in PBS supplemented with 2 mM MgCl2 . 
GPS was added to 10 % and mixtures incubated at 37 °C . 
Samples were taken at 30 min intervals for viable counts . 
The experiment was replicated several times with similar outcomes . 
Fig. 3 . 
Comparison of LPS proﬁles of S. typhimurium C5 and wzz mutants after growth in either HIHS or LB . 
LPS prepared from selected strains grown overnight in 1 ml of medium was separated on an SDS-15 % - polyacrylamide gel ( each lane corresponding to 2 × 108 cfu ) and detected by silver-staining . 
L = long modal range ( 16 -- 35 repeat units ) , VL = very long modal range ( > 100 repeat units ) . 
Numbers on the left of the ﬁgure indicate the number of Oag units in each LPS population . 
An asterisk indicates growth in heat-inactivated serum . 
C5DwzzST demonstrated an almost 60-fold increase in serum resistance from only 1.2 % survival ( LB-grown ) to 69 % survival ( HIGPS-grown ; P < 0.001 , Student 's t-test ; panel B ) . 
This level of survival was the same as that for the complemented strain C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE [ pWSK29-wzzfepE ] . 
C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE showed high complement susceptibility regardless of growth medium illustrating that the induced serum resistance is dependent on WzzfepE activity . 
LB-grown C5DwzzST assayed in 10 % HIGPS demonstrated approximately 100 % survival throughout the assay ( data not shown ) , indicating that complement was responsible for the bacterial killing . 
Bacteria grew to approximately the same density ( cfu/ml ) when grown in either LB , HIGPS or LB chelated with 2,2 ′ - dipyridyl ( see below , data not shown ) . 
In a separate set of complement sensitivity assays using 90 % serum similar results were obtained . 
Growth in 100 % HIGPS signiﬁcantly increased the complement resistance of C5 , from 47 % survival ( LB-grown ) to 89 % survival at 2 h ( P < 0.01 , Student 's t-test ) . 
C5DwzzST demonstrated an increase in serum resistance from only 0.12 % survival ( LBgrown ) to 60 % survival at 2 h ( HIGPS-grown ; P < 0.001 , Student 's t-test ) . 
3.5. The effect of growth under iron-limiting conditions on LPS proﬁle
Since wzzfepE is located in the ferric enterochelin synthesis and transport cluster that is regulated by iron levels , we investigated if iron limitation affects LPS [ 9 ] . 
Strains were grown under iron-limiting conditions by culture in LB che-lated with 100 µM 2,2 ′ - dipyridyl . 
Their LPSs were analysed by silver-stained SDS-PAGE . 
C5 and C5DwzzST showed an increase in the quantity of LPS with very long Oag under iron-limiting conditions ( Fig. 5 ) . 
No change in LPS phenotype was observed in C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE or C5DwzzfepE indicating that this phenomenon is wzzfepE dependent . 
LPS with the long type Oag modal range was also unaffected . 
When FeCl3 was titrated back into the iron-chelated medium , the level of very long type Oag production in C5DwzzST was reduced ( data not shown ) indicating that the mechanism for alteration in density of LPS with very long Oag is related to iron limitation , and not the presence of 2,2 ′ - dipyridyl per se . 
This indicates the presence of an iron-sensitive pathway for regulation of very long type Oag that is dependent on wzzfepE 
Fig. 4 . 
Comparison of serum survival for S. typhimurium C5 and wzz mutants after growth in either heat-inactivated GPS or LB . 
Bacterial cultures were grown overnight in 1 ml of medium , washed then diluted in PBS supplemented with 2 mM MgCl2 containing Cm . 
GPS was added to a ﬁnal concentration of 10 % ( v/v ) and mixtures incubated at 37 °C . 
Samples were taken at 30 min intervals for viable counts . 
Data points represent percentage survival ( mean ± S.D. , n = 3 assays ) . 
Note that the y-axis has a linear scale . 
Panel A. C5 and C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE . 
Statistical analysis comparing survival of C5 grown under each condition is indicated ( * = P < 0.05 , ** = P < 0.01 , Student 's t-test ) Panel B. C5DwzzST and C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE [ pWSK29-wzzfepE ] . 
Cultures grown under iron-limiting conditions were tested for serum sensitivity ( Fig. 6 ) . 
C5 and C5DwzzfepE showed > 100 % survival after growth either in LB or under ironlimiting conditions ( with no signiﬁcant difference ; P > 0.05 , Student 's t-test ) . 
C5DwzzST demonstrated a signiﬁcant increase in serum resistance after growth in iron-limiting conditions ( from 7 % survival to 28 % ; P < 0.01 , Student 's t-test ) . 
C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE showed no increase in complement resistance after growth in iron-limiting conditions , demonstrating that this effect is wzzfepE dependent . 
In fact , the 2,2 ′ - dipyridyl-cultured C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE showed a statistically signiﬁcant decrease in survival compared to growth in LB ( P < 0.05 , Student 's t-test , at points 60 , 90 and 120 min ) . 
The complemented strain C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE [ pWSK29-wzzfepE ] showed > 100 % survival , and was included in the assay to demonstrate that the increased density of very long type Oag chains confers complement resistance . 
A comparison of complement resistance was also made for C5DwzzST following growth in either iron-limiting medium , HIGPS or LB in 1.5 ml reaction tubes for 16 h ( Fig. 4 ) . 
While growth in HIGPS raised complement resistance from 1.2 % survival to 69 % survival , growth in iron-chelated LB only increased the complement resistance to 20 % survival at 2 h , signiﬁcantly lower than in HIGPS ( P < 0.01 , Student 's t-test ) . 
Furthermore , addition of iron to HIGPS did not appear to suppress production of very long type Oag ( data not shown ) . 
This would suggest that potential signals in addition to iron limitation are stimulating adaptation in serum . 
3.7 . 
Construction of a wzzfepE reporter fusion and analysis of expression levels under iron-limiting conditions 
The gene wzzfepE may possess an iron-responsive promoter [ 19 ] that could explain the alterations in LPS phenotype resulting from growth in the presence of 2,2 ′ - dipyridyl 
Fig. 5 . 
Comparison of LPS proﬁles of S. typhimurium C5 and wzz mutants after growth in either iron-limiting medium or LB . 
LPS prepared from selec-ted strains was separated on an SDS-15 % - polyacrylamide gel ( each lane corresponding to 2 × 108 cfu ) and detected by silver-staining . 
L = long modal range ( 16 -- 35 repeat units ) , VL = very long modal range ( > 100 repeat units ) . 
An asterisk indicates growth in iron-limiting medium . 
Fig. 6 . 
Comparison of serum survival of S. typhimurium C5 and wzz mutants after growth in either iron-limiting medium or LB . 
Bacterial cultures were diluted in PBS supplemented with 2 mM MgCl2 containing Cm . 
GPS was added to a ﬁnal concentration of 10 % ( v/v ) and mixtures incubated at 37 °C . 
Samples were taken at 30 min intervals for viable counts . 
Data points represent percentage survival ( mean ± S.D. , n = 3 assays ) . 
Some of these data are also represented in Fig. 1 . 
3.6 . 
The effect of growth in iron-limiting conditions on complement resistance in C5DwzzST 
This was examined using a transcriptional lacZ reporter construct . 
Plasmid pKOK6 .1 is designed for construction of lacZ fusions , and contains multiple cloning sites ﬂanking a promoterless lacZ gene and a KmR selection marker [ 17 ] . 
A chromosomal wzzfepE : : lacZ promoter fusion was constructed in C5 as described in Section 2 . 
The level of expression of wzzfepE was found to be very low and outside the optimum range for measurement ( data not shown ) . 
The low level of promoter activity was conﬁrmed with real-time PCR of C5 RNA , where messenger RNA transcripts of wzzfepE were not be detected ( data not shown ) . 
To detect promoter activity , pWSK29-wzzfepE : : lacZ-KmR ( a plasmid containing the promoter fusion , see Materials and Methods ) was electroporated into C5 . 
When present in higher copy number in C5 [ pWSK29-wzz : : lacZ-KmR ] the wzz fepE fepE promoter activity was detected ( Table 2 ) . 
However , there was no signiﬁcant increase in promoter activity after incubation in 2,2 ′ - dipyridyl ( Student 's t-test ) . 
4. Discussion
S. typhimurium encounters many different environments in vivo that stimulate expression of virulence factors to counter host defences . 
Serum sensitivity results indicated that the wzzST gene ( providing long modal length Oag ) was primarily responsible for serum resistance . 
The presence of wzzfepE ( providing a very long Oag length ) provided little serum resistance alone under normal conditions of in vitro growth , but may have a synergistic effect on serum survival when combined with wzzST . 
These results contrast to ﬁndings with Shi-gella ﬂexneri where the longer of two Oag modal lengths provides serum resistance [ 20 ] . 
Upon exposure to 10 % serum , the serum sensitive strain S. typhimurium C5DwzzST demonstrated a wzzfepE-dependent adaptation to serum . 
Examination of LPS after growth in heat-inactivated serum found an increase in very long type Oag material ( conferred by wzzfepE ) in both C5 and C5DwzzST . 
This modiﬁed LPS phenotype was associated with a signiﬁcant increase in serum resistance . 
There was no corresponding increase in Oag density in the long modal length conferred by wzzST . 
Of note , strains assayed after 16 h growth in LB showed lower survival than those assayed after growth to log phase in LB , most likely because they were harvested in a different growth phase . 
The increased serum resistance is likely to be a result of increased density of very long type Oag chains and an increased average Oag chain length preventing complement component access to the outer membrane [ 4,6 -- 8 ] . 
The virtually identical serum resistance of HIGPS-grown C5DwzzST and LB-grown C5DwzzSTDwzzfepE [ pWSK29-wzzfepE ] ( Fig. 4B ) supports this explanation . 
This leads us to propose that during the course of infection , the WzzST conferred long Oag chains initially provide resistance to complement , while subsequently the very long type Oag chains conferred by WzzfepE are upregulated and provide additional resistance . 
This may also result in decreased complement activation by long Oag chains through steric hindrance by very long type Oag chains ( G.M. , S.R.A. and R.M. , unpublished data ) . 
The gene wzz is located in an iron-regulated , iron transfepE port cluster [ 21 ] and it was also previously indicated that wzz ( formerly called fepE ) possesses a weakly ironfepE responsive promoter [ 19 ] . 
Under iron-limiting conditions the density of LPS with very long type Oag was increased in wzz + fepE strains , with an accompanying increase in serum resistance in C5Dwzz . 
Culturing C5Dwzz Dwzz under ST ST fepE iron-limiting conditions actually increased complement sensitivity , possibly due to up-regulation of outer membrane iron-uptake proteins ( such as FepA ) that may interact with complement or pre-existing antibody . 
S. typhimurium grown in ironlimiting medium did not appear to have a changed density of LPS with Oag in the long modal range . 
Interestingly , the induction of complement resistance was much more effective after growth in serum compared to iron-chelated medium , suggesting that a pathway of signalling other than iron limitation may exist in serum . 
In support of this , when iron was added to the HIGPS growth medium production of LPS with very long type Oag was not obviously suppressed as was the case for iron-chelated medium ( data not shown ) . 
The generalised iron limitation present in host tissue may result in persistent up-regulation of the very long type Oag modal length , providing S. typhimurium with resistance to complement and other defence proteins such as bactericidal / permeability increasing protein ( BPI ) [ 22 ] . 
Such adaptation resembles the PhoPQ-regulated adaptive response of S. typh-imurium in the macrophage where multiple lipid A modiﬁcations reduce the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial peptides [ 23 ] . 
Exposure to serum has previously been reported to enhance S. choleraesuis and Bacteroides spp . 
serum survival [ 24,25 ] while growth of E. coli in various media caused alterations in Oag length and increased complement or BPI resistance [ 22,26 ] . 
These studies and the relatively widespread occurrence of WzzfepE orthologues [ 9 ] suggest that regulation of LPS Oag chains may be common . 
Porat et al. [ 27 ] selected spontaneous stable serum-resistant clones of E. coli that possessed an altered LPS proﬁle with greater quantities of LPS with very long Oag ; these mutants may have constitutive activation of a pathway for up-regulation of LPS with very long Oag similar to that proposed in this study . 
Based on gene dosage observations the simplest explanation for the changes in density of very long Oag chains is alteration in wzzfepE gene transcription . 
A wzzfepE : : lacZ pro moter fusion failed to show a signiﬁcant change in regulation of wzz under iron-limiting conditions . 
This is not consisfepE tent with the suggestion of Shea and McIntosh [ 19 ] -- who indicated the presence of a weakly iron-sensitive promoter for wzzfepE -- but is not unexpected because studies performing genome-wide screens for iron-responsive promoters have failed to identify the wzzfepE promoter [ 28,29 ] . 
The PhoPQ two-component sensor-regulator is involved in multiple in vivo adaptations [ 23 ] . 
However , the phoPc ( constitutive ) and phoP ( negative ) mutations did not affect induction of the proposed pathway ( data not shown ) , indicating that it operates independently of the PhoPQ regulon and may involve the regulation of undeﬁned factors acting in LPS Oag synthesis . 
This study has shown that S. typhimurium possesses a wzzfepE-dependent , serum-inducible mechanism for alteration in its cell surface architecture that contributes to complement resistance . 
This ﬁnding expands our appreciation of variability in LPS structure ; LPS may be changed to suit environmental conditions both in the lipid A-core moiety and Oag chain length . 
Since the mouse model of infection concludes in septicaemia , and bacteraemia occurs in approximately 5 % of non-typhoid clinical infections [ 30 ] , this adaptation may be an important mechanism that promotes systemic infection in non-typhoid Salmonella . 
Table 2 
b-Galactosidase activity of C5 [ pW ferent conditions Strain 
SK29-wzzfepE : : lacZ ] cultured under dif ¬ 
Growth conditions b-galactosidase a units DH5 LB + 0.7 mM IPTG 409 C5wzz : : lacZ LB 4.7 fepE C5wzz : : lacZ LB + 100 µM 2,2 ′ - 7.7 fepE dipyridyl a Data represent the mean from three experiments . 
Standard error 43 1.2 2.1 
[ 7 ] 
[ 8 ] 
[ 9 ] 
G.L. Murray , S.R. Attridge , R. Morona , Regulation of Salmonella typhimurium lipopolysaccharide O antigen chain length is required for virulence ; identiﬁcation of FepE as a second Wzz , Mol . 
Microbiol . 
47 ( 2003 ) 1395 -- 1406 . 
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Elizabeth Anderson for technical assistance and Uwe Stroeher for assistance with the real-time PCR assay . 
Financial support was provided by The Pest Animal Control Cooperative Research Centre , Australia , and a National Health and Medical Research Council Program Grant . 
G.L.M. is the recipient of an Australian Postgraduate Award and Premier 's Scholarship in Biotechnology ( The University of Adelaide ) . 
References 
[ 10 ] R.L. Lucas , C.A. Lee , Unravelling the mysteries of virulence gene regulation in Salmonella typhimurium , Mol . 
Microbiol . 
36 ( 2000 ) 1024 -- 1033 . 
[ 11 ] P. Mastroeni , Immunity to systemic Salmonella infections , Curr . 
Mol . 
Med . 
2 ( 2002 ) 393 -- 406 . 
[ 12 ] M.J. Blaser , R.A. Feldman , From the Centers for Disease Control . 
Salmonella bacteremia : reports to the Centers for Disease Control , 1968 -- 1979 , J. Infect . 
Dis . 
143 ( 1981 ) 743 -- 746 . 
[ 13 ] M. Weinberger , N. Andorn , V. Agmon , D. Cohen , T. Shohat , S.D. Pitlik , Blood invasiveness of Salmonella enterica as a function of age and serotype , Epidemiol . 
Infect . 
132 ( 2004 ) 1023 -- 1028 . 
[ 14 ] S.J. Baker , C. Daniels , R. Morona , PhoP/Q regulated genes in Salmo-nella typhi identiﬁcation of melittin sensitive mutants , Microb . 
Pathog . 
22 ( 1997 ) 165 -- 179 . 
[ 15 ] R. Morona , L. Van den Bosch , P.A. Manning , Molecular , genetic , and topological characterization of O-antigen chain length regulation in Shigella ﬂexneri , J. Bacteriol . 
177 ( 1995 ) 1059 -- 1068 . 
[ 16 ] K.A. Datsenko , B.L. Wanner , One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in Escherichia coli K-12 using PCR products , Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 97 ( 2000 ) 6640 -- 6645 . 
[ 17 ] W. Kokotek , W. Lotz , Construction of a lacZ-kanamycin-resistance cassette , useful for site-directed mutagenesis and as a promoter probe , Gene 84 ( 1989 ) 467 -- 471 . 
[ 18 ] J.H. Miller , in : Experiments in molecular genetics , Cold Spring Harbour Laboratory Press , New York , 1992 , pp. 352 -- 355 . 
[ 19 ] C.M. Shea , M.A. McIntosh , Nucleotide sequence and genetic organization of the ferric enterobactin transport system : homology to other periplasmic binding protein-dependent systems in Escherichia coli , Mol . 
Microbiol . 
5 ( 1991 ) 1415 -- 1428 . 
[ 20 ] M. Hong , S.M. Payne , Effect of mutations in Shigella ﬂexneri chromosomal and plasmid-encoded lipopolysaccharide genes on invasion and serum resistance , Mol . 
Microbiol . 
24 ( 1997 ) 779 -- 791 . 
[ 21 ] C.M. Litwin , S.B. Calderwood , Role of iron in regulation of virulence genes , Clin . 
Microbiol . 
Rev. 6 ( 1993 ) 137 -- 149 . 
[ 22 ] J. Weiss , M. Hutzler , L. Kao , Environmental modulation of lipopolysaccharide chain length alters the sensitivity of Escherichia coli to the neutrophil bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein , Infect . 
Immun . 
51 ( 1986 ) 594 -- 599 . 
[ 23 ] E.A. Groisman , The pleiotropic two-component regulatory system PhoP -- PhoQ , J. Bacteriol . 
183 ( 2000 ) 1835 -- 1842 . 
[ 24 ] W.L. Ho , R.C. Yu , C.C. Chou , Effect of iron limitation on the growth and cytotoxin production of Salmonella choleraesuis SC-5 , Int . 
J. Food Microbiol . 
90 ( 2004 ) 295 -- 302 
[ 25 ] E. Allan , I.R. Poxton , The inﬂuence of growth medium on serum sensitivity of Bacteroides species , J. Med . 
Microbiol . 
41 ( 1994 ) 45 -- 50 . 
[ 26 ] P.W. Taylor , P. Messner , R. Parton , Effect of the growth environment on cell-envelope components of Escherichia coli in relation to sensitivity to human serum , J. Med . 
Microbiol . 
14 ( 1981 ) 9 -- 19 . 
[ 27 ] R. Porat , M. Johns , W. McCabe , Selective pressure and lipopolysaccharide subunits as determinants of resistance of clinical isolates of Gram-negative bacilli to human serum , Infect . 
Immun . 
55 ( 1987 ) 320 -- 328 . 
[ 28 ] R.M. Tsolis , A.J. Baumler , I. Stojiljkovic , F. Heffron , Fur regulon of Salmonella typhimurium : identiﬁcation of new iron-regulated genes , J. Bacteriol . 
177 ( 1995 ) 4628 -- 4637 . 
[ 29 ] J. Bjarnason , C.M. Southward , M.G. Surette , Genomic proﬁling of iron-responsive genes in Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium by high-throughput screening of a random promoter library , J. Bacteriol . 
185 ( 2003 ) 4973 -- 4982 . 
[ 30 ] E.L. Hohmann , Nontyphoidal salmonellosis , Clin . 
Infect . 
Dis . 
32 ( 2001 ) 263 -- 269