Peptides 26 ( 2005 ) 2057 -- 2063 
Functional selection of a type IV pili-binding peptide that speciﬁcally inhibits Salmonella Typhi adhesion to/invasion of human monocytic cells
Hong-Yan Wu a , Xiao-Lian Zhang a , b , c , ∗ , Qin Pan a , Jianguo Wu c 
a Department of Immunology , Wuhan University School of Medicine , Donghu Road 115 # , Wuhan 430071 , PR China b Key laboratory of Allergy and Immune-related Diseases , and Center for Medical Research , Wuhan University School of Medicine , Wuhan 430071 , PR China c State Key Laboratory of Virology , College of Life Sciences , Wuhan University , Wuhan 430072 , PR China 
Received 24 January 2005 ; received in revised form 8 March 2005 ; accepted 9 March 2005 Available online 14 April 2005 
Abstract 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi ( S. Typhi ) is an important pathogen which infects humans exclusively and causes typhoid or enteric fever . 
Recently it has been discovered that type IVB pili , encoded by the S. Typhi pil operon located in the major pathogenicity island , may be important in the pathogenesis of epidemic enteric fever . 
To further investigate the roles of type IVB pili of S. Typhi , a 12-mer peptide ( RQERSSLSKPVV ) , binding to the structural protein PilS of the type IVB pili of S. Typhi , was isolated with a ribosome display system . 
This peptide was designated as peptide R . 
We found that peptide R inhibited adhesion to/invasion of human monocytic THP-1 cells by piliated S. Typhi bacteria , but had no effects on nonpiliated S. Typhi bacteria . 
A random 12-mer peptide , of size and solubility equal to peptide R , served as a control on the speciﬁcity of peptide R . 
The speciﬁc interaction and binding equilibrium between the 12-mer peptide R and PilS protein was determined by isothermal titration calorimetry ( ITC ) and a binding constant Ka determined to be between 0.4 × 105 and 2.2 × 105 L mol − 1 . 
Our ﬁndings suggest that the type IV pili-binding peptide R holds potential as an antibacterial peptide effective against S. Typhi infections , both in terms of prevention and therapeutic treatment . 
The data further provide insights into the understanding of the pathogenic roles of the type IVB pili of S. Typhi . 
© 2005 Elsevier Inc. . 
All rights reserved . 
Keywords: Ribosome display; Salmonella Typhi; Type IVB pili; Binding peptide
1. Introduction
Of the more than 2300 closely-related Salmonella serovars identiﬁed , Salmonella ( S. Typhi ) is an important human-speciﬁc pathogen , transmitted through contaminated food and water . 
The bacterium causes typhoid or enteric fever , which is a serious public health problem in developing countries . 
S. Typhi bacteria efﬁciently invade the human intestinal mucosa and survive as intracellular pathogens of macrophages/monocytes and possibly dendritic cells . 
S. Typhi bacteria are facultative intracellular parasites . 
Infection caused by S. Typhi remains an important public health problem , particularly in developing countries . 
Morbidity and mortality attributable to typhoid fever are once again increasing with the emergence and worldwide spread of S. Typhi strains that are resistant to most previously useful antibiotics [ 5 ] . 
So there is an interest in understanding the detailed aspects of typhoid pathogenesis , and a need for the development of new anti-typhoid drugs [ 5 ] . 
Recently , it has been shown that type IVB pili , encoded by the S. Typhi pil operon located in the major pathogenicity [ 8,15 ] island , are used to facilitate bacterial entry into human intestinal cells in vitro , and may be important in the mediation of enteric fever in humans [ 23 ] . 
The type IVB pili also mediate bacterial self-association , which may enhance invasiveness of S. Typhi for humans at a very early step in S. Typhi pathogenesis in the anaerobic human small intestine 
∗ Corresponding author . 
Tel. : +86 27 87331183 ; fax : +86 27 87336380 . 
E-mail address : zhangxl65@hotmail.com ( X.-L . 
Zhang ) . 
0196-9781 / $ -- see front matter © 2005 Elsevier Inc. . 
All rights reserved . 
doi :10.1016 / j.peptides .2005.03.03 
[ 2,13 ] . 
These reports indicated that the type IVB pili might play important roles in the pathogenesis of S. Typhi in humans . 
In order to further explore the roles of the type IVB pili in the infection of human monocytic cells , and to search for new peptides effective to prevent bacterial invasion of human cells , we applied a ribosome display system in this study to identify a peptide as a speciﬁc ligand that binds to the major structural protein , PilS , of the type IVB pili . 
Ribosome display is a technology for the in vitro selection and evolution of very large protein libraries . 
The selection and directed evolution of proteins is of great interest , because proteins play essential roles in nearly all biological processes and are extensively used in diagnostic , therapeutic , and industrial applications . 
Most of the methods used for the selection of proteins as carriers of relevant phenotypes have been based directly or indirectly on protein expression in living cells . 
Examples of these approaches include the yeast two-hybrid system and phage display [ 4,10 ] . 
However , in vivo selections are limited by transformation efﬁciency to 1 -- 10 × 109 different molecules . 
In the ribosome display approach , the entire procedure is performed in vitro , without using cells at any step [ 1,6,9,21 ] . 
In ribosome display , genotype and phenotype are linked through ribosomal complexes , consisting of messenger RNA ( mRNA ) , ribosome , and encoded protein . 
These complexes are used for selection and this technique allows a much larger sampling of random sequences ( 1013 ) than has been previously possible . 
Using this technology , we have identiﬁed a peptide ligand that speciﬁcally binds to the structural protein , PilS , of the type IVB pili . 
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
in this study according to procedures described previously [ 23 ] . 
S. Typhi J341 ( Ty2 Vi − ) [ 23 ] is the wild-type strain , while S. Typhi strain pilS : : KmR is a nonpiliated S. Typhi , in which the expression of PilS is prohibited [ 23 ] . 
Luria -- Bertani broth ( LB ) was prepared as described by Miller [ 12 ] . 
Solid medium contained 1.5 % ( w/v ) agar . 
Human acute monocytic leukemia cell line THP-1 cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium with 10 % ( v/v ) fetal bovine serum ( Gibco ) . 
E. coli DH5 and E. coli BL21 ( DE3 ) [ plysS ] were used 
2.2. Expression and puriﬁcation of prePilS-GST fusion protein
The PCR product of the pilS gene was digested with EcoRI and BamHI , puriﬁed , and inserted into the EcoRI and BamHI sites of plasmid pGEX-2T to yield plasmid pGEXS5 , in which pilS was fused in frame with the GST gene . 
The plasmid pGEXS5 was transformed into E. coli BL21 ( DE3 ) [ plysS ] . 
The prePilS-GST fusion protein was induced by growing the transformant with 1 mM IPTG for 4 h. Cells were sonicated in PBS and the fusion protein puriﬁed using a Glutathione-Sepharose ; 4B ( Amersham Biosciences ) column . 
2.3. Preparation of polyclonal antibody
To prepare an antiserum against the PilS protein , BALB/c male mice , two months old , were immunized . 
Some 50 to 200 g GST-PilS protein/mouse , in 0.2 mL 1 × phosphatebuffered saline ( PBS ) , was emulsiﬁed with an equal volume of Freund 's adjuvant ( complete for the ﬁrst inoculation , incomplete for the later injections ) prior to intraperitoneal injection . 
The mice received ﬁve injections in all over two months ; the serum obtained was stored at − 20 ◦ C. 
2.4. Construction of DNA templates
a single-stranded 90-mer with the following sequence : 5 ′ - ACCGGATCCATGATGATGATGATGATGGCCGGA ( NN - M ) 12GCTAGCCATGGATATATGTCC-3 ′ , where the central ( NNM ) 12 represents random oligonucleotides . 
M may be A or C , N may be A , T , G or C . 
The template for transcription/translation was synthesized by two rounds of PCR . 
The ﬁrst round of PCR used primer U1 : 5 ′ - GCTCGTATAATGTGTGGCCACAACGGAAGGAGATAT - ATCCATG-3 ′ , and primer D1 : 5 ′ - GGCATACACTTGAA-GGTGAGCCACTACCACTTCCACTACCGGATCCATGA - TG-3 ′ . 
The second round of PCR used primer U2 : 5 ′ - GC-GCTGCAGTTGACAATTAATCATCGGCTCGTATAATG - TGTG-3 ′ and primer D1 . 
The second round PCR products were used for the in vitro coupled transcription/translation reaction . 
The procedure is summarized ( Fig. 1 ) . 
The random oligonucleotide template was synthesized as 
DNA li 
Fig. 1 . 
Construction of a random brary . 
The details are in the text 
The second round PCR products were expressed in the E. coli S30 Extract System for the synthesis of linear templates . 
The DNA template , amino acid mixture , S30 Premix and S30 Extract were incubated at 30 ◦ C for 2.5 h . 
The products were used for afﬁnity selection directly . 
In order to optimize the amount of DNA added and to optimize expression [ 35S ] - methionine was used to determine the amount of radiolabeled amino acid incorporated into protein during the coupled transcription/translation reaction . 
The coupled transcription/translation product was precipitated with 25 % ( w/v ) TCA and collected by ﬁltration onto Whatman GF/A glass microﬁber ﬁlters . 
The ﬁlter was washed with 5 % ( v/v ) TCA and acetone , and [ 35S ] incorporation measured in a liquid scintillation counter . 
2.6. Afﬁnity selection
Afﬁnity selection was performed as described previously , with minor modiﬁcations [ 19 ] . 
The coupled transcription/translation product was incubated with prePilS-GST - ◦ Sepharose 4B by gently shaking at 4 C for 1 h . 
After washing three times with ice-cold buffer ( 50 mM Tris acetate , pH 7.5 ; 150 mM NaCl ; 1 % ( v/v ) Tween-20 ; 5 mM magnesium acetate ) , the retained ribosomal complexes were dissociated with ice-cold elution buffer ( 50 mM Tris acetate , pH 7.5 ; 150 mM NaCl ; 10 mM EDTA ) for 10 min at 4 ◦ C by gentle shaking , and released mRNA was recovered using an RNaid Kit . 
Puriﬁed RNA was subsequently used for RT-PCR . 
The procedure is summarized ( Fig. 2 ) . 
2.7. Cloning and sequencing
Bacterial number ( no peptide R ) − bacterial number ( peptide R ) × Bacterial number ( no peptide R ) 
= 
with PstI and BamHI and then subcloned into pUC19 After the selection , RT-PCR products were digested 
( PstI and BamHI digestion ) , which was then transformed into E. coli DH5 . 
Plasmid DNA was isolated , puri-ﬁed from E. coli DH5 , and subsequently analyzed by sequencing . 
2.8. Cell invasion and adherence assay
Human acute monocytic leukemia cell line THP-1 cells were maintained and prepared for bacterial adherence and invasion assays as described [ 18 ] . 
The S. Typhi strains ( wildtype J341 and nonpililated Typhi pilS : : KmR ) were grown in LB without shaking for 14 -- 16 h at 30 ◦ C to reach an optical density at OD600 nm of 0.5 -- 0.7 . 
Prior to infection , the bacteria were incubated with either peptide R or peptide Y at 37 ◦ C for 15 min . 
Then , bacteria were added to human THP-1 cells ( 2.5 × 105 cells/well ) in 24-well plates at a ratio of 10:1 ( bacterial cells : human cells ) . 
Following incubation at 37 ◦ C for 2 h in a 5 % ( v/v ) CO2 atmosphere , cells were harvested by centrifugation at 1500 × g for 10 min and washed thrice with PBS . 
Gentamycin ( 200 g/mL ﬁnal concentration ) was added to kill residual extracellular bacteria . 
Subsequently , THP-1 cells were washed three more times and lysed with 1 % ( v/v ) Triton X-100 to release intracellular bacteria . 
The released bacteria were grown on LB agar plates with kanamycin ( nonpililated S. Typhi ) and without kanamycin ( wild-type S. Typhi J341 ) for colony enumeration . 
Basic controls for each experiment included bacteria only ( no THP-1 cells ) and THP-1 cells only . 
The percentage of adherence / invasion inhibition effected by a peptide was calculated as follows : 
= 
ition 
ib 
) Inh 
( % 
100 % 
p nd rib reverse PCR ampliﬁcation . 
ig . 
2 . 
Ribosome display to select peptides of interest . 
A DNA library con open reading frames lacking stop codons was transcribed and translated in itro . 
The ribosome was stalled at the end of the mRNA . 
The encoded prot s not released and folded correctly on the ribosome . 
The mRNA-ribosome-rotein complexes were used for afﬁnity selection . 
After washing , the bou osomal complexes were dissociated . 
The mRNA was puriﬁed and used fo 
F taining v ein wa 
ITC measurements were carried out at 37 ◦ C using a VP-ITC titration calorimeter ( MicroCal , Northampton , MA ) . 
All solutions were thoroughly degassed before use , by stirring under vacuum . 
Before each experiment , the ITC sample cell was washed several times with PBS . 
The sample cell was loaded with 1.43-mL of protein solution ( pH 7.2 -- 7.4 ) , and the reference cell contained doubly distilled water . 
Titration was carried out using a 250 L syringe ﬁlled with the peptide solution ( pH 7.2 ) , with stirring at 300 rpm . 
The concentrations of the peptides were 1 mM . 
Injections were started after baseline stability had been achieved . 
A titration experiment consisted of 28 consecutive injections , each 10 L in volume and of 20 s duration , with a 6 min interval between injections . 
To correct for the thermal effects of dilution and mixing , control experiments were performed in which peptide was injected into an identical solution but without protein . 
The heat released by dilution of protein solution was negligible . 
Calorimetric data was analyzed using MicroCal ORIGIN software 5.0 . 
As the ligand concentration increases , the association reaction becomes saturated and subsequently less heat is evolved or absorbed on further addition of the material being titrated . 
The amount of heat evolved on the addition of ligand can be represented by the equation Q = V H [ M ] K [ L ] / ( 1 + K [ L ] ) , where V0 is the volume of the cell , Hb is the enthalpy of binding per mole of ligand [ M ] t is the total macromolecule concentration including bound and free fractions , Ka is the binding constant , and [ L ] is the free ligand concentration . 
The enthalpy change for each injection series was calculated by integrating the area under the recorded peaks of enthalpy changes and then subtracting the value given by the control titration . 
0 b t a a 
Fig. 3 . 
The expression of random 12-mer peptides by the ribosome display system increases with increasing input DNA . 
The details are in the text . 
3. Results
important for efﬁcient ribosome display of proteins . 
In this study , we designed a tac promoter sequence and a ribosomebinding site ( RBS ) , followed by the sequence encoding the protein to be displayed , to effect strong transcription . 
In addition , at both ends of the mRNA , 5 ′ - stem-loops and 3 ′ - stem-loops were included in the ribosome display system to stabilize mRNA against RNase digestion ( Figs. 1 and 2 ) . 
E. coli S30 Extract System and the products were collected and measured . 
The translation efﬁciency of random 12-mer peptides by the ribosome display expression system was dependent on the level of the template ( Fig. 3 ) , thus demonstrating that the ribosome display system constructed worked successfully . 
The size of the random library translated was 1014 distinct random 12-mer peptides . 
tein of the type IVB pili of S. Typhi , we utilized prePilS-GST Several features of the ribosome display construct are Different amounts of DNA template were translated in the To isolate peptides that speciﬁcally bind to the PilS pro-as a selection target . 
The prePilS-GST fusion protein was expressed in E. coli and identiﬁed with Coomassie blue R-250 staining and immunoblotting using an anti-prePilS-GST antibody ( Fig. 4 ) . 
The reason why prePilS , and not PilS , was used as the attractant for the nascent peptides is because PilS is very difﬁcult to handle due to a propensity to aggregate . 
The prePilS protein is more hydrophilic than is PilS . 
The leader signal peptide aa1 -- aa25 is hydrophilic in nature , while the region aa26 -- aa52 is highly hydrophobic . 
The prePilS protein is soluble , and thus amenable to puriﬁcation and manipulation . 
The random ribosome display system was used , and mRNA-attached peptide products bound to prePilS-GST-Sepharose 4B beads . 
An unmeasureably small fraction of total mRNA product was bead-associated . 
A total of 12 individual clones from RNA that bound to prePilS-GST-Sepharose 4B beads was selected and the binding peptide sequence inferred from DNA sequencing . 
The sequence of all 12 peptides was RQERSSLSKPVV . 
This was termed peptide R and was 58.3 % identical ( 7/12 aa residues ) with peptide Kelch repeat and BTB ( POZ ) domain ( GenBank accession no . 
NP-689606 ) , which function normally as protein binding domains [ 7 ] . 
It was reported that the cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator ( CFTR ) acts as receptor for S. Typhi on human gastrointestinal cells [ 20 ] . 
The region aa 763 -- aa 778 ( RNRRQSVLNLMTRPSV ) of CFTR also bears similarity ( 5/16 aa residues identical ) with peptide R sequence ; this CFTR region , however , is not the ﬁrst extracellular CFTR domain identiﬁed as the receptor domain for S. Typhi . 
Next , we synthesized the 12-mer peptide R ( RQER-SSLSKPVV ) and a control 12-mer peptide Y ( YKLPGHHHHYRP ) , both with more than 95 % HPLC purity . 
The random 12-mer peptide Y was chosen to have the same degree of hydrophilicity , and to be of the same size , as peptide R . 
The effects of peptide R ( RQERSSLSKPVV ) on the inhibition of S. Typhi infection were examined by the cell invasion and adherence assays . 
Our results showed that peptide R speciﬁcally inhibited wild-type S. Typhi J341 entry into THP-1 cells , but peptide Y did not inhibit invasion or adherence ( Fig. 5 ) . 
Further , neither peptide R nor peptide Y inhibited the entry of nonpiliated S. Typhi into THP-1 cells ( Fig. 5 ) . 
ITC is the most quantitative means available for measuring the thermodynamic properties of a protein -- protein interaction [ 17 -- 19 ] . 
In our experiment , aliquots of a 1 mM peptide R solution were injected into a 10 M prePilS-GST protein solution , and it was shown that an exothermic interaction occurred ( Fig. 6A ) . 
Analysis using different models of MicroCal ORIGIN software indicated that a one-site protein -- protein interaction binding model was the best ﬁt for the integrated curve of peptide R binding , giving the smallest error with respect to the experimental data . 
This work indicated that the binding between peptide R and prePilS-GST protein was through one site ( Fig. 6A ) . 
Peptide R bound with high afﬁnity to prePilS-GST , and had very low binding afﬁn-ity for GST protein . 
A curve of enthalpy generation from the binding between peptide R and prePilS-GST protein was integrable , and the binding constant Ka was determined to be between 0.4 × 105 and 2.2 × 105 L mol − 1 . 
It was also shown that there was no integrable curve of enthalpy generation from the binding between peptide R and GST protein and thus no binding ( Ka is too low to be measured ) between peptide R and GST protein ( Fig. 6B ) 
Fig. 3 . 
The expression of random 12-mer peptides by the ribosome display system increases with increasing input DNA . 
The details are in the text . 
Fig. 4 . 
Analysis of puriﬁed GST-prePilS on SDS-PAGE . 
A , Coomassie blue staining . 
Lane 1 , GST protein ; lane 2 , GST-prePilS fusion protein ; lane 3 , low range SDS-PAGE protein standard mixture ; B , Western blot : lane 1 , GST protein ; lane 2 , GST-prePilS fusion protein 
Fig. 5 . 
Speciﬁc inhibition of piliated S. Typhi adhesion to/invasion of human THP-1 cells . 
by peptide R . 
The details are in the text . 
Fig. 6 . 
ITC proﬁles of the binding of peptides to protein . 
Top , data obtained from 28 automatic injections , of sequential 10 L amounts of a 1 mM peptide R solution , injected into a 10 M GST-prePilS protein solution in A , or a 10 M GST protein solution in B , at 15 ◦ C ; Bottom , the integrated curve of enthalpy generation showing points ( squares ) and best ﬁt ( line ) . 
Plot of the heat evolved per mole of peptide R added against the molar ratio of peptide to GST-prePil in A , or to GST in B. 
4. Discussion
The type IVB pil operon in S. Typhi contains 11 genes , pilLMNOPQRSTUV , of which pilS encodes the main structural protein of the type IVB pili [ 22,23 ] . 
The type IVB pili of S. Typhi are found only in serovar Typhi and a few human -- invasive strains of S. Paratyphi C and S. Dublin , not in S. Typhimurium , which is normally non-invasive for humans . 
In the present study we found that piliated wild-type S. Typhi J341 adhered to and entered human monocytic THP-1 cells better than did the nonpiliated S. Typhi strain pilS : : KmR . 
We further employed PilS protein as the target for afﬁnity selection and obtained a peptide ligand which inhibited bacterial adhesion to and invasion of human THP-1 cells . 
Many methods can be used to analyze protein -- protein interactions , but the yeast two-hybrid system [ 10 ] and phage display [ 4 ] are limited by the involvement of living cells in the process of library generation or screening . 
This is not the case for in vitro selection technologies . 
Therefore , we applied the ribosome display system in this work . 
ands by ribosome display was reported , a large amount of effort has been made to improve the method [ 17 ] . 
In this study , we introduced some modiﬁcations of the ribosome display system . 
First , the 5 ′ - untranslated region of the ribosome display construct contained the tac promoter for efﬁcient transcription . 
Second , we designed 5 ′ - stem loops and 3 ′ - stem-loops in order to protect mRNA against degradation by RNase , as such modiﬁcations to mRNA might be expected to protect mRNA against degradation by RnaseE [ 3 ] . 
Stemloop sequences in the construct led to a higher efﬁciency of ribosome display . 
Third , a Gly-Ser sequence was incorporated in the aa residues ﬂanking the variable region , which can increase the ﬂexibility of the peptide in space . 
It has been shown in many studies that the ribosome covers between 20 and 30 C-terminal amino acids of a polypeptide chain during synthesis , and the provision of adequate space and ﬂexibility are useful for the protein to recognize to and bind to the target of interest . 
absorbed or released during a binding reaction ( i.e. the binding enthalpy change ) . 
Here , binding equilibrium data were determined directly by measuring the heat evolved on association of a ligand with its binding partner . 
As the ligand concentration increased , the association reaction became saturated and subsequently less heat was evolved or absorbed on further addition of the material under titration . 
ITC is there-Since the ﬁrst description of the in vitro selection of ligITC measures binding interactions by detecting the heat fore a universal method and has been applied to a wide range of chemical and biochemical binding interactions [ 11,14,16 ] . 
Numerous examples of antibody-antigen binding have been characterized by isothermal titration calorimetry . 
Very tight binding complexes ( such as antibody-antigen interactions ) yield K values in the range 109 a to 1010 L mol − 1 , complexes of strong-to-medium strength give Ka values in the range 104 to 106 L mol − 1 , and complexes with low binding afﬁnities yield K values of less than 102 L mol − 1 a . 
Our experimental results have provided evidence of strong binding and interaction between peptide R and PilS protein . 
We have not checked the binding abilities of peptide R to other proteins or bacterial structures . 
The fact that the peptide ( a ) binds strongly to prePilS-GST-Sepharose : and ( b ) does not bind to GST-Sepharose , indicates that the peptide is prePilS-speciﬁc . 
The peptide shows a high ability to inhibit S. Typhi adhesion to/invasion of human monocytic cells , suggesting that peptide R holds potential as a new antibacterial peptide against S. Typhi bacterial infections . 
In summary : ( 1 ) an improved ribosome display system was successfully used , ( 2 ) a speciﬁc peptide ligand ( peptide R ) binding to the type IVB pili of S. Typhi was isolated with this ribosome display system , and ( 3 ) peptide R could inhibit bacterial adhesion to/invasion of human THP-1 cells . 
It is possible that development of immunity ( by vaccination ) to the PilS domain that attaches to peptide R would block entry of the pathogen into the gut mucosa . 
To our knowledge this is the ﬁrst report of a peptide ligand speciﬁc for the type IVB pili of S. Typhi and may provide information for the development of new drugs against bacterial infections , both in terms of prevention and therapeutic treatment . 
The peptide will be useful in a study of the detailed interactions between the PilS protein and its natural receptor on the human intestinal cell surface . 
Acknowledgements
ural Science Foundation of China ( 30270076 ) , the Ministry of Education Scientiﬁc Research Foundation for Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars ( 301153033 ) , an Outstanding Youth Scholars Grant from Hubei Province ( 2002AC017 , 2002AA301B15 ) and Wuhan University ( 301270055 , 301276010 ) . 
This work was supported by grants from National Nat ¬ 
References 
[ 1 ] Amstutz P , Forrer P , Zahnd C , Pluckthun A . 
In vitro display technologics : novel developments and applications . 
Curr Opin Biotechnol 2001 ; 2:400 -- 5 . 
[ 2 ] Bieber D , Ramer SW , Wu CY , Toru M , Fernandez R , Schoolrik GK . 
Type IV pili , transient bacterial aggregates , and virulence of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli . 
Science 1998 ; 280:2114 -- 8 . 
[ 3 ] Bouvet P , Belasco JG . 
Control of RNase E mediated RNA degradation by 5X-terminal base pairing in E. coli . 
Nature 1992 ; 360:488 
[ 4 ] Dunn IS . 
Phage display of proteins . 
Curr Open Biotechnol 1996 ; 7:547 -- 53 . 
[ 5 ] Graham SM . 
Salmonellosis in children in developing and developed countries and populations . 
Curr Opin Infect Dis 2002 ; 15 ( 5 ) :507 -- 12 . 
[ 6 ] Hanes J , Pluckthun A . 
In vitro selection and evolution of functional proteins by using ribosome display . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997 ; 94:4937 -- 42 . 
[ 7 ] http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db= Protein & list uids = 45593142 & dopt = GenPept . 
[ 8 ] Liu SL , Sanderson KE . 
Rearrangements in the genome of the bacterium Salmonella typhi . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995 ; 92:1018 -- 22 . 
[ 9 ] Mattheakis LC , Bhatt RR , Dower WJ . 
An in vitro polysome display system for identifying ligands from very large peptide libraries . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994 ; 91:9022 -- 6 . 
[ 10 ] Mendelsohn AR , Brent R. Protein interaction methods-toward an endgame . 
Science 1999 ; 284:1948 -- 50 . 
[ 11 ] Michael LD . 
Characterization of binding interactions by isothermal titration Calorimetry . 
Curr Opin Biotechnol 1997 ; 8:31 -- 5 . 
[ 12 ] Miller JH . 
Experiments in molecular genetics . 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory . 
NY : Cold Spring Harbor ; 1972 . 
[ 13 ] Morris C , Yip CMC , Tsui ISM , Wong DKH , Hackett J . 
The shuf-ﬂon of Salmonella enterica serovar typhi regulates type IVB pilusmediated bacterial self-association . 
Infect Immunol 2003 ; 71:1141 -- 6 . 
[ 14 ] Ozen C , Serpersu EH . 
Thermodynamics of aminoglycoside binding to aminoglycoside-3 ′ - phosphotransferase IIIa studied by isothermal titration calorimetry . 
Biochemistry 2004 ; 43 ( 46 ) :14667 -- 75 . 
[ 15 ] Pickard D , Wain J , Baker S , Line A , Chohan S , Fookes M , et al. . 
Composition , acquisition , and distribution of the Vi exopolysaccharide -- encoding Salmonella enterica pathogenicity island SPI-7 . 
J Bacteriol 2003 ; 185:5055 -- 65 . 
[ 16 ] Pierce MM , Raman CS , Barry TN . 
Isothermal titration calorimetry of protein -- protein interactions . 
Methods 1999 ; 19:213 -- 21 . 
[ 17 ] Schafﬁtzel C , Hanes J , Permutes L , Pluckthun A. Ribosome display : an in vitro method for selection and evolution of antibodies from libraries . 
J Immunol Methods 1999 ; 231:119 -- 35 . 
[ 18 ] Schmitt CK , Ikeda JS , Darnell SC , Watson PR , Bispham J , Wallis TS , et al. . 
Absence of all components of the ﬂagella export and synthesis machinery differentially alters virulence of Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium in models of typhoid fever , survival in macrophages , tissue culture invasiveness , and calf enterocolitis . 
Infect Immunol 2001 ; 69:5619 -- 25 . 
[ 19 ] Takahashi F , Ebihara T , Mie M , Endo Y , Kobatake E , Aizawa M. Ribosome display for selection of active dihydrofolate reductase mutants using immobilized methotrexate on agarose beads . 
FEBS Lett 2002 ; 514:106 -- 10 . 
[ 20 ] Tsui ISM , Yip CMC , Hackett J , Morris C . 
The type IVB Pili of Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhi Bind to the Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator . 
Infect Immunol 2003 ; 71:6049 -- 50 . 
[ 21 ] William JD , Larry CM . 
In vitro selection as a powerful tool for the applied evolution of proteins and peptides . 
Curr Opin Chem Biol 2002 ; 6:390 -- 8 . 
[ 22 ] Zhang X-L , Morris C , Hackett J. Molecular cloning , nucleotide sequence , and function of a site-speciﬁc recombinase encoded in the major ` pathogenicity island ' of Salmonella typhi . 
Gene 1997 ; 202:139 -- 46 . 
[ 23 ] Zhang X-L , Tsui ISM , Yip CMC , Fung AWY , Wong DKH , Dai X-Y , et al. . 
Salmonella enterica serovar typhi uses type IVB pili to enter human intestinal epithelial cells . 
Infect Immunol 2000 ; 68:3067 -- 73