Salmonella type III secretion host cell’s strings Markus C Schlumberger and
The enteric pathogen Salmonella employs type III secretion systems to transport a cocktail of effector proteins directly into its host cell . 
These effectors act in concert to control a variety of host cell processes to successfully invade intestinal cells and to establish an intracellular , replication-permissive niche . 
Recent studies reveal new insights into the molecular mechanisms that underlie effector protein injection , host cell invasion , and manipulation of vesicle trafﬁcking induced by the interplay between multiple effectors and host systems . 
These ﬁndings corroborate the importance of spatio-temporal regulation of effector protein function for ﬁne-tuned modulation of the host cell machinery . 
Institute of Microbiology , ETH Zürich , Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 10 , CH-8093 Zürich , Switzerland 
Corresponding author : Hardt , Wolf-Dietrich ( hardt@micro.biol.ethz.ch ) 
Introduction
Salmonella spp . 
are Gram-negative enteropathogenic bacteria that infect a variety of mammalian , avian and reptile hosts [ 1 ] . 
Salmonelloses are among the most common and widely distributed food-borne diseases in humans and represent a major public health and economical burden worldwide . 
During their long-standing co-evolution with their hosts , Salmonella spp . 
have evolved sophisticated virulence mechanisms to manipulate host-cell functions to their own beneﬁt . 
This includes specialized protein secretion systems capable of delivering cocktails of bacterial ` effectors ' directly into the host cell . 
These so-called type III secretion systems ( TTSSs ) play a central role in the Salmonella -- host interaction . 
Salmonella enterica serovars possess two TTSSs ( TTSS-1 and TTSS-2 ) , which are encoded in discrete regions of the Salmonella chromosome [ 2 ] . 
TTSS-1 and -2 have quite different functions [ 3 ] ( Figure 1 ) . 
TTSS-1 is expressed when the bacteria are moving extracellularly in the gut lumen before the ﬁrst encounter with host cells . 
It is required for initiating intestinal inﬂammation [ 4,5 ] . 
TTSS-1 triggers invasion of gut epithelial cells and enhances colonization of the underlying tissue ( lamina propria ) and spread to systemic sites . 
Upon entry into host tissues , S. enterica resides in a vacuolar compartment within host cells , namely macro-phages , dendritic cells and possibly epithelial cells . 
This requires the TTSS-2 , which steers maturation of the Salmonella-containing vacuole ( SCV ) , prevents oxidative killing , facilitates systemic spread of the infection and might modulate immune responses [ 6 -- 8 ] . 
Thus , TTSS-2 is essential for systemic infection and enhances intestinal inﬂammation [ 9 -- 11 ] . 
Key aspects of Salmonella virulence are attributable to the TTSS effector protein cocktails . 
Understanding their function promises new insights into Salmonella pathogenesis . 
The key components of these cocktails have been identiﬁed recently and the molecular function of several Salmonella TTSS effector proteins are known . 
The next step is to learn how the different effectors cooperate . 
This includes possible hierarchies in effector protein delivery , their translocation kinetics and their spatio-temporal distribution inside the host cell . 
Thus , effector protein cocktail function will have to be interpreted as an intricate and precisely timed manipulation of a complex host cell signaling network . 
In this review , we discuss recent progress in the understanding of the molecular functions of Salmonella type III secreted effector proteins and their interactions with the host cell machinery . 
In particular , we will emphasize the spatio-temporal regulation of effector protein function as the basis for efﬁcient host cell manipulation . 
Triggering TTSS-1 injection: ‘connecting the syringe’
TTSS-1 is expressed during extracellular growth in appropriate liquid cultures and in the intestine . 
Recently , it was observed that only a percentage of bacteria ( 20 -- 40 % ) appear to express TTSS-1 ( [ 12,13 ] ; B Stecher and WD Hardt , unpublished ) . 
The biological consequences of this ﬁnding remain to be analyzed . 
Nevertheless , the TTSS-1-expressing bacteria target host cells as ` loaded weapons ' equipped with both the syringe-like TTSS-1 apparatuses ( 10 -- 100 per cell ; [ 14 ] ) as well as a pre-formed pool of effectors ( e.g. 3000 -- 9000 molecules of SipA ; 
[ 13 ] ) . 
Before host cell contact , spontaneous release of effectors from extracellular bacteria is detectable , but is fairly slow ( t1/2 > 30 min ) . 
Timing of effector protein injection
Docking of Salmonella to intestinal cells triggers the fast injection of TTSS-1 effector proteins within a few seconds [ 13 ,15 -- 19 ] . 
Fast injection continues until the preformed bacterial effector protein pool is depleted ( see Figures 1 and 2 ) . 
Wild-type Salmonella typhimurium requires only 80 -- 200 s for translocation of its entire SipA and SopE pools [ 13 ] ( see Update ) . 
Thus , S. typhimurium quickly delivers its load of effector proteins into one single cell . 
As a consequence it invades , switches to the intracellular lifestyle and down-regulates TTSS-1 expression . 
By contrast , bacteria that do not express TTSS-1 remain extracellular ( Figure 1 ) . 
Early signaling: injection gains speed
TTSS-1 effector proteins mediate entry into host cells . 
This appears to have consequences for the translocation process itself . 
In the beginning , only the TTSS apparatuses that are in direct contact with the host cell are activated and begin rapid translocation . 
Because host cell responses are already triggered at this stage [ 20 ] , the host membrane starts to engulf the bacterium . 
Thereby , further TTSS apparatuses appear to be triggered and effector protein injection , membrane engulfment and possibly other host responses continuously gain speed until the bacterium is engulfed completely ( see Figures 1 and 2 ) . 
This model is supported by several observations [ 13 ] . 
Most importantly , a ` non-invasive ' mutant requires more time than wild-type S. typhimurium to deliver the same amount of SipA ( 100 -- 600 s versus 80 -- 200 s ) , presumably because it lacks the TTSS-1 effectors that trigger bacterial engulfment by the host membrane and thus can not engage additional TTSS-1 apparatuses after the initial docking event . 
Molecular nature of the trigger
The molecular mechanism that triggers TTSS-1 is still enigmatic . 
It is clear that transport of the effectors across the host cell plasma membrane requires the formation of a pore structure called the ` translocon ' [ 21,22 ] . 
The three TTSS-1 substrates SipB , SipC and SipD are involved in this and each is essential for injection of all effector proteins [ 23 -- 25 ] . 
It is thought that SipB and SipC insert into and associate within the plasma membrane to form a multimeric translocon complex [ 26 -- 28 ] . 
This process might be guided by SipD [ 25,27,29 ] ( see Update ) . 
Recent evidence suggests that direct binding of SipB to cholesterol might initiate translocon assembly [ 30 ] . 
Cho-lesterol is abundant in the host plasma membrane ( but not the bacterium ) and is required for efﬁcient TTSS-1 trans-location and Salmonella invasion into host cells [ 30 ,31 ] . 
As the homologous Shigella TTSS can be triggered in vitro by cholesterol-rich raft-like liposomes [ 32 ] , the SipB -- cholesterol interaction might represent an essential step for triggering fast TTSS-1 effector injection . 
But is translocon assembly the rate limiting step in triggering TTSS-1 in vivo ? 
Further work will have to address whether , in vivo , TTSS-1 is triggered by cholesterol alone or in conjunction with other lipids , raft-associated proteins or sugar structures . 
Host cell invasion : shaping the cytoskeleton Efﬁcient Salmonella invasion requires the concerted function of at least ﬁve TTSS-1 effectors . 
They target the actin cytoskeleton in different ways to cause localized membrane rufﬂing , bacterial engulfment and uptake ( Figure 3 ) . 
Our molecular understanding of this process has tre-mendously advanced during the past years ( reviewed in [ 33 -- 35 ] ) . 
Direct actin manipulation
SipA and SipC act directly and cooperatively on actin and mediate polymerization and bundling [ 36,37 ] . 
The car-boxy-terminal actin-binding domain of SipA acts as a ` molecular staple ' for actin subunits of the ﬁlament [ 38 ] . 
This enhances actin polymerization and controls excessive de-polymerization by host cell proteins ( ADF / coﬁlin , gelsolin ) [ 39 ] . 
SipC promotes actin nucleation and ﬁlament bundling in vitro [ 40 ] . 
The in vivo analysis has been challenging owing to the dual function of SipC in translocon formation and actin remodeling . 
Chang et al. [ 41 ] have recently dissociated these two functions . 
Actin nucleation requires SipC residues 201 -- 220 , but effector protein translocation does not . 
Importantly , a Salmonella SipCDaa201 -- 220 strain caused attenuated membrane rufﬂing , indicating that the actin nucleation activity of SipC contributes directly to actin rearrangements . 
In conclusion , SipA and SipC themselves can produce small F-actin foci at sites of bacteria -- host cell contact [ 13 ] . 
However , they can not induce rufﬂing or invasion by themselves , but seem to locally modulate more global responses triggered by other TTSS-1 effectors , namely SopE , SopE2 and SopB [ 20,36,42 ] . 
A sopEsopE2sopB triple mutant can not induce membrane rufﬂing and invasion [ 43,44 ] . 
These latter TTSS-1 effectors do not interact with actin directly but manipulate signaling cascades that control the actin cytoskeletal architecture . 
Manipulation of signaling pathways
The TTSS-1 effectors SopE and SopE2 mimic the function of so called G-nucleotide exchange factors . 
They activate G-binding proteins of the Rho-family -- key regulators of host cell architecture -- and their catalytic mechanism has been characterized in great detail [ 45 -- 50 ] . 
Substrate speciﬁcity seems to differ slightly between SopE2 and SopE : SopE2 can activate Cdc42 whereas SopE activates Cdc42 and Rac1 [ 51 ] . 
The biological consequences of SopE/E2 speciﬁcity are still not understood . 
Rac1 and Cdc42 have been proposed to play distinct roles during Salmonella infection : cytoskeletal remodeling and altering gene expression , respectively [ 33,52 ] . 
Alternatively , the role of each RhoGTPase might differ between different target cells . 
The TTSS-1 effector SopB is a phosphatidylinositol phosphatase and contributes indirectly to RhoGTPase activation by generation of several potential secondary messengers [ 43,53 ] . 
Although the exact signaling pathways are not fully understood , the RhoGTPase activation probably occurs by targeting endogenous phosphoinosi-tide-regulated G-nucleotide exchange factors of the Dbl family . 
Recent results suggest that SopB might also negatively regulate actin ﬁlament formation through its amino-terminal non-catalytic region ( residues 118 -- 142 ; [ 54 ] ) . 
The cooperative activation of Cdc42 and Rac1 by SopB , SopE and SopE2 ultimately leads to recruitment and activation of the Arp2/3 complex , which promotes actin nucleation and branching [ 55 ] . 
This occurs through its interactions with members of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein family , such as N-WASP and WAVE2 [ 56,57 ] . 
Whereas N-WASP is directly activated by Cdc42 and PtdIns ( 4,5 ) P2 , activation of WAVE2 by Rac1 during Salmonella infection seems to depend on a large multiprotein complex ( Nap1 -- Pir121 -- Abi1 ) [ 58,59 ] . 
In summary , host cell invasion results from the orche-strated action of at least ﬁve effectors ( Figure 3 ) . 
These effectors seem to have different distributions inside the host cell , some acting locally ( SipA and SipC ) and some acting elsewhere in the host cell ( SopB , SopE and SopE2 ) . 
This leads to complex patterns of effector cocktail distribution ( Figure 2 ) . 
Moreover , these concentration patterns will change during the course of the invasion process . 
To fully understand the cooperativity between these different effectors , it will be important to investigate the spatio-temporal aspects of effector protein delivery , activity , distribution and stability . 
It is clear that multi-dimensional time-lapse microcopy will be of great value for studying these questions at a single-cell level . 
Real-time measurements of SipA injection revealed that local effector concentrations sufﬁcient for actin manipulation can be reached within 20 s after bacterial docking [ 13 ] , providing ﬁrst estimates of effector concentrations at this crucial early phase of infection . 
Moreover , Kubori and Galan [ 60 ] demonstrated the differential regulation of effector protein stability by protea-some-dependent degradation . 
Inside the host cell , SopE is degraded rather quickly whereas another effector called SptP is only slowly degraded . 
SptP inactivates Cdc42 and Rac1 [ 61 ] and thereby reverses SopB - , SopE - and SopE2-signaling . 
Thus , rufﬂing halts after 30 -- 60 min and the host cell regains its original architecture after invasion is completed . 
This offers the ﬁrst insights into how differential regulation of local effector concentrations inﬂuences the modulation of host responses . 
Forming an intracellular niche and protecting the host
The multiple functions of SopB SopB can process a variety of phosphoinositide and inositolphosphate species [ 53,62 -- 65 ] . 
For example , SopB rapidly consumes PtdIns ( 4,5 ) P2 on the invaginating membrane [ 63 ] . 
Later in the process , SopB ensures the maintenance of high levels of PtdIns ( 3 ) P in the SCV membrane [ 65 ] . 
Thereby , SopB promotes efﬁcient membrane ﬁssion and formation of the phagosome , contributes to SCV maturation , and thus is an important factor for the establishment of the intracellular niche of Salmonella [ 63,65 ] . 
SopB might have additional functions that act long after the formation of the SCV . 
SopB-dependent phosphorylation and activation of Akt seem to protect infected epithelial cells from apoptosis [ 66 ] . 
Furthermore , this activity contributes to the stimulation of nitric oxide ( NO ) production [ 67 ] , which might represent a mechan-ism for controlling excessive Salmonella proliferation [ 68 ] . 
Therefore , it is tempting to hypothesize that these ` late ' functions of SopB could serve to protect the cells hosting Salmonella and thus help to maintain the bacteria 's own sheltered niche [ 69 ] . 
Maintaining the SCV by way of TTSS-2
TTSS-2 is of key importance for the ability of Salmonella to survive and to replicate inside host cells . 
TTSS-2 is induced 1 -- 4 h after bacterial internalization . 
In contrast to TTSS-1 , the TTSS-2 effectors are probably produced and delivered continuously in this niche to ensure bacterial survival and intracellular replication over long per-iods of time ( Figure 1 ) . 
More than ten TTSS-2 effector proteins have been identiﬁed . 
Although the host cell targets and biochemical activities of these effectors are largely unknown , many of them have been shown to modulate host cell functions , especially cytoskeletal organization and membrane trafﬁcking ( reviewed in [ 6,7 ] ) . 
Recent work has identiﬁed trafﬁcking along microtubule networks to be a key target for TTSS-2 function . 
The microtubule motor proteins dynein and kinesin have opposing transport functions on microtubules , and TTSS-2 carefully balances their activity . 
To date , SifA is the best characterized TTSS-2 effector . 
SifA directly targets SKIP ( SifA and kinesin-interacting protein ) , a down-regulator of kinesin motor activity , in order to inhibit the association of the SCV with kinesin [ 70 ] . 
Furthermore , SifA also seems to interfere with the binding of Rab7 to RILP ( Rab7-interacting lysosomal protein ) . 
Upon binding to active Rab7 , RILP mediates the recruitment of dynein to Rab7-containing membrane compartments . 
Thus , SifA appears to control dynein recruitment to the SCV by blocking the Rab7 -- RILP interaction [ 71,72 ] . 
One can speculate that other TTSS-2 effectors also contribute to the delicate balance of dynein/kinesin recruitment and to the subsequent reorganization of late endosomal compartments ( LECs ) along the microtubule scaffold . 
Recent studies suggest that some of them ( SopD2 , SseJ and PipB2 ) act in concert to mediate bidir-ectional redistribution of LECs along microtubules [ 73 -- 77 ] , whereas others ( SseF and SseG ) mediate microtubule bundling and LEC aggregation into continuous membrane structures associated with the SCV [ 78 -- 80 ] . 
In combination , their activities orchestrate SCV maturation and maintenance during the intracellular phase of Salmonella . 
Thus , TTSS-2 provides another example for steering a speciﬁc host cell function by simultaneous manipulation of multiple factors controlling the process . 
Again , information on activity , timing and local concentrations will be the key to understanding cooperativity between the different TTSS-2 effectors . 
Conclusions
The sophisticated interplay between Salmonella TTSS effectors and host cell signaling pathways offers an amazing example of the complexity of pathogen -- host interactions that have emerged during long-standing co-evolution . 
Deciphering this complex meshwork of interactions is challenging . 
In the past , we have focused on characterization of the activity of single effector proteins . 
However , to appreciate their role in the infection process , future research will have to focus on the complex interactions of the different effectors inside the host cell and their cooperativity . 
Many questions remain to be answered . 
Are all TTSS-1 effectors injected at the same time or is there a hierarchy of injection ? 
How do local effector protein concentrations change over time ? 
How does this affect local concentrations of signaling mole-cules inside the host cell ? 
And how do these signaling cascades cooperatively lead to responses such as engulfment ? 
These issues are of special interest during the early phase of the bacteria -- host cell interaction when effector protein concentrations are still low . 
Quantitative studies will be required to understand the complex interplay between effector proteins and host targets , taking into account their local concentrations , localizations , stabilities and activities . 
Furthermore , the temporary nature of many processes triggered by type III secreted effectors and their inhomogeneous expression between individual bacteria demands for new types of assay systems . 
Clearly , real-time analysis and single cell assays will be of great importance to unravel the mechan-isms of host manipulation by Salmonella spp . 
Recent work has begun to address the spatio-temporal aspects of Salmonella pathogenesis and further studies offer a promising perspective for unravelling the interplay of Salmonella virulence factors and host cell pathways at the molecular level . 
Update
Structural analysis of the Yersinia Ysc type III needle complex provides novel insights into the mechanism of translocon assembly in the host cell plasma membrane . 
The Yersinia V-antigen LcrV can form a distinct structure at the tip of the Ysc needle complex , which might function as an assembly platform for the translocon pore . 
Further work will have to address whether the Salmonella protein SipD ( or other proteins ) might have a similar function . 
Of note , there is no clear sequence similarity between SipD and the Yersinia LcrV protein [ 83 ] . 
Recently , a new method has been described for the visualization of the type III secretion process in real-time . 
This method uses biarsenic compounds for ﬂuorescent labeling of short tetracysteine peptide sequences fused to the Shigella type III effectors IpaB and IpaC . 
The injection of the labeled effectors into eukaryotic host cells leads to the depletion of the effectors from the bacteria . 
This depletion can be analyzed in real-time by monitoring the decrease in the intrabacterial ﬂuorescence signal . 
The results reported for the Shigella effectors IpaB and IpaC are well in line with the parameters of TTSS-1-mediated SipA translocation by Salmonella [ 84 ] . 
Several additional Salmonella proteins have been identi-ﬁed that are delivered into eukaryotic cells by TTSSs . 
It is clear that more aspects of host cell manipulation by Salmonella effectors will be discovered in the next years [ 85,86 ] . 
Acknowledgements
The authors apologize to those whose work could not be cited owing to space limitations . 
Work in the authors ' laboratory is funded by grants from the Swiss National Science Foundation ( 3100A0-100175 / 1 ) and Swiss Federal Institute of Technology ( ETH ) Zürich . 
13 . 
Schlumberger MC , Muller AJ , Ehrbar K , Winnen B , Duss I , Stecher B , Hardt WD : Real-time imaging of type III secretion : Salmonella SipA injection into host cells . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005 , 102:12548 -12553 . 
Using time-lapse microscopy , this study visualizes the type III injection of SipA in real-time . 
Coupled with quantitative measurements of SipA levels and localization , it provides new insights into spatio-temporal aspects of effector protein interplay and illustrates the efﬁciency of type III secretion . 
30 . 
Hayward RD , Cain RJ , McGhie EJ , Phillips N , Garner MJ , Koronakis V : Cholesterol binding by the bacterial type III translocon is essential for virulence effector delivery into mammalian cells . 
Mol Microbiol 2005 , 56:590 -603 . 
This study describes the direct binding of SipB and its Shigella homologue IpaB to cholesterol in the host plasma membrane , and highlights the importance of this interaction for translocon assembly and subsequent effector protein delivery into the host cell . 
39 . 
McGhie EJ , Hayward RD , Koronakis V : Control of actin turnover by a salmonella invasion protein . 
Mol Cell 2004 , 13:497 -510 . 
This study illustrates how the direct interaction of SipA with F-actin affects the function of host actin depolimerizing factors ADF/co ﬁlin and gelsolin , highlighting the ability of SipA to locally modulate the host machinery of actin reorganization . 
40. Hayward RD, Koronakis V: Direct nucleation and bundling of actin by the SipC protein of invasive Salmonella. EMBO J 1999, 18:4926-4934.
41. Chang J, Chen J, Zhou D: Delineation and characterization of the actin nucleation and effector translocation activities of
Salmonella SipC . 
Mol Microbiol 2005 , 55:1379 -1389 . 
This is the ﬁrst study to delineate the actin nucleating activity of SipC from its general role in TTSS-1 effector protein translocation , providing the ﬁrst insights into the role of SipC in actin remodelling in vivo . 
65. Hernandez LD, Hueffer K, Wenk MR, Galan JE: Salmonella modulates vesicular trafﬁc by altering phosphoinositide metabolism. Science 2004, 304:1805-1807.
66. Knodler LA, Finlay BB, Steele-Mortimer O: The Salmonella effector protein SopB protects epithelial cells from apoptosis by sustained activation of Akt. J Biol Chem 2005, 280:9058-9064.
67 . 
Drecktrah D , Knodler LA , Galbraith K , Steele-Mortimer O : The Salmonella SPI1 effector SopB stimulates nitric oxide production long after invasion . 
Cell Microbiol 2005 , 7:105 -113 . 
This study describes the prolonged presence of SopB inside the host cell after injection and its role in stimulation of nitric oxide production hours after bacterial invasion . 
It demonstrates that TTSS-1 effectors can still be active after induction of TTSS-2 and highlights the multiple roles of SopB . 
69. Tierrez A, Garcia-del Portillo F: New concepts in Salmonella virulence: the importance of reducing the intracellular growth rate in the host. Cell Microbiol 2005, 7:901-909.
70 . 
Boucrot E , Henry T , Borg JP , Gorvel JP , Meresse S : The intracellular fate of Salmonella depends on the recruitment of kinesin . 
Science 2005 , 308:1174 -1178 . 
This study demonstrates that the TTSS-2 effector SifA targets the host protein SKIP to control the association of the SCV with kinesin . 
This provides a molecular mechanism of how TTSS-2 effectors delicately balance the activity of microtubule motors to create and maintain a replication-permissive intracellular niche .