Salmonella transcriptomics: relating regulons, stimulons and regulatory networks to the process of infection Arthur Thompson, Gary Rowley, Mark Alston, Vittoria Danino and Jay CD Hinton
The advent of Salmonella transcriptomics has heralded a new era for gene expression analysis of this formidable intracellular pathogen . 
Increasing numbers of Salmonella transcriptomic datasets will contribute to the comprehensive deﬁnition of regulons , stimulons and regulatory networks . 
This task has 
Molecular Microbiology Group , Institute of Food Research , Norwich Research Park , Norwich , NR4 7UA , UK 
Introduction
Many serovars of Salmonella enterica cause gastrointestinal and systemic diseases in animals . 
Infections with the serovars Paratyphi and Typhi remain speciﬁc to humans and are mainly transmitted through contaminated water ; annually , there are approximately 16 million cases of the systemic typhoid disease , resulting in 600 000 deaths [ 1 ] . 
Current estimates suggest that S. enterica is responsible for up to 124 million cases of human gastroenteritis each year in industrial and developing nations [ 2 ] . 
Most of these infections are caused by the presence of S. enterica in the food chain as a result of the widespread colonisation of farm animals . 
Following ingestion , Salmonella penetrates gut epithelial cells , resulting in enteritis ; in a minority of cases , systemic infections result from the uptake of Salmonella by pha-gocytic cells , followed by transmission to the lymph nodes , spleen and liver . 
Pathogenic Salmonella serovars carry sets of horizontally acquired genes , which are often clustered together into Salmonella pathogenicity islands ( SPIs ) . 
These islands encode proteins involved in several 
A breakthrough in the monitoring of gene expression came with the advent of microarray technology [ 11 ] . 
The beginning of the 21st century has seen the development of Salmonella transcriptomics , and this was triggered by the publication of the complete genome sequence of S. typhimurium strain LT2 [ 12 ] . 
More recently , the sequences of the fully virulent S. typhimur-ium SL1344 strain and several other Salmonella serovars have been completed ( http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Projects/ Microbes ) , or will soon be available The LT2 microarrays were ﬁrst constructed in 2001 from PCR products that represented every coding sequence in LT2 [ 13 -- 15 ] . 
Centres using Salmonella microarrays include the Institute of Food Research and The Sanger Institute in the UK , and the Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center in San Diego , USA . 
Salmonella microarrays can be obtained from The Institute for Genomic Research Pathogen Functional Genomics Resource Center in the USA ( http://pfgrc.ti-gr.org/ ) . 
Oligonucleotide and PCR primer sets for the construction of S. typhimurium LT2 and S. typhi micro-arrays are also available commercially from Qiagen and Sigma-Genosys . 
Since 2001 , most Salmonella transcriptomic experiments have been designed to further our understanding of Salmonella virulence ( Table 1 ) . 
The experiments ﬁt into three broad categories : expression proﬁling of Salmonella grown in infection-relevant conditions in vitro , transcriptomic analysis of global regulatory mutants attenuated for virulence and proﬁling of Salmonella gene expression within mammalian cells . 
Here , we present a summary of the currently available transcriptomic data in these areas , and discuss approaches for their comparison and analysis . 
Deﬁning Salmonella regulons and stimulons
One of the strengths of transcriptomics is the ability to completely deﬁne regulons and their regulatory networks , particularly with regard to virulence mechanisms . 
Transcriptomic analysis of S. typhimurium has deﬁned the regulons for polynucleotide phosphorylase ( PNPase ) , CsrA , Fis , histone-like nucleoid-structuring protein ( H-NS ) and phage shock protein Psp , as well as establishing the effect of various stresses , ranging from microgravity to temperature and bile ( Table 1 ) . 
One of the underlying themes of all of these studies is to understand the mechanisms of gene regulation . 
Of the regulators that have been studied , Fis is a nucleoid-associated protein which is expressed upon nutrient upshift and the H-NS nucleoid-associated protein is involved in the integration of environmental signals . 
CsrA is a post-transcriptional regulator which alters the stability of its target mRNAs and controls metabolic processes , as well as motility and invasion-gene expression . 
PNPase modulates RNA stability by degrading certain messages and is a component of the bacterial RNA degradasome [ 16 ] . 
Most importantly , all of these regulators were found to inﬂuence the expression of varying numbers of virulence genes . 
The majority of genes that were most strongly activated by Fis have a role in colonisation of the gastrointestinal tract , and include genes from SPI1 , SPI2 , SPI3 and SPI5 [ 17 ] . 
Recently , by demonstrating that an increase in temperature from 25 8C to 37 8C resulted in the activation of over 200 H-NS-dependent S. typhimurium genes , we showed that H-NS is an essential component of the thermoregulatory system of Salmonella [ 18 ] . 
The regulators CsrA , Fis and H-NS were all shown to induce the expression of many SPI1 , motility and che-motaxis-related genes [ 19 ] . 
Of the 87 genes that were upregulated in the pnp mutant in vitro , 51 genes were located in SPI1 and SPI2 [ 13 ] . 
The differing roles of these four regulatory proteins in virulence gene expression are likely to reﬂect the complexity of control required for successful adaptation of Salmonella to the intracellular host environment . 
We observed that upregulation of ﬂagellar genes generally accompanies the upregulation of virulence genes , suggesting strong regulatory links between the three type III secretion systems in S. enterica . 
Before invading the host gut epithelial cell , Salmonella has to withstand stresses such as anoxia , acid and exposure to bile during its transit through the stomach and intestinal tract . 
Bile is a component of the innate immune response and is a complex mixture of several bacteriocidal agents , including bilirubin , cholesterol and bile salts . 
S. typhimur-ium gene expression proﬁles were deﬁned after exposure to bile [ 20 ] . 
A total of 101 bile-induced and 129 bile-repressed genes were identiﬁed , conﬁrming that bile is an important environmental trigger for transcription in S. typhimurium . 
The bile-repressed genes included several genes belonging to SPI1 , such as the major SPI1 regulators hilAC and invF , as well as motility - and chemotaxisrelated genes . 
SPI1 genes were also downregulated by the addition of spent culture supernatant from the probiotic bacterium Lactobacillus [ 21 ] ; these included HilA-depen-dent SPI1 genes . 
Finally , a review of Salmonella transcriptomics would not be complete without mentioning the S. typhimurium lowshear modelled microgravity ( LSMMG ) regulon [ 14,15 ] . 
Here , it was found that virulence gene expression was speciﬁcally sensitive to gravitational force , and genes located in SPI1 were downregulated . 
However , it was found that Salmonella virulence was increased by LSMMG , as measured by mouse infection and macro-phage survival assays . 
This intriguing study suggests a novel Salmonella virulence mechanism , and underscores the remarkably complex regulatory mechanisms involved in Salmonella virulence ; such mechanisms could be relevant to space travel . 
Upon infection of a host , Salmonella is challenged with a cocktail of antimicrobial agents . 
These include cationic antimicrobial peptides ( CAMPs ) , which are produced at several infection sites . 
Using transcriptomic and proteo-mic approaches , it was shown that exposure of S. typhi-murium to CAMPs induced PhoP , an important global regulator required for the survival of S. typhimurium in a mouse model [ 22 ] . 
The PhoPQ two-component system responds to Mg concentrations ; it has been hypothe-2 + sised that PhoQ directly senses levels of CAMP in host tissues , where Mg concentrations are relatively low [ 23 ] . 
2 + 
Sensitivity to CAMPs is also regulated by SlyA , a transcriptional regulator found in Salmonella and Escherichia coli ; mutation of slyA renders S. typhimurium highly sensitive to the CAMP polymyxin B [ 24 ] . 
Recently , a transcriptomic analysis found a high degree of overlap between the PhoPQ and SlyA regulons and showed that most of the coregulated genes were involved in virulence and resistance to CAMPs . 
The level of SlyA protein was shown to be almost unchanged in a phoP mutant and a phoPQ constitutive mutant compared with the wild-type strain during early stationary and stationary phase growth [ 25 ] . 
Two intriguing models were presented to explain how PhoPQ and SlyA might interact to regulate virulence gene expression . 
The regulatory mechanism for resistance to CAMPs is even more complex , as shown by a transcriptomic study which deﬁned the PmrAB regulon [ 26 ] . 
PmrAB is a two-component system involved in the lipopolysaccharide modiﬁcation that modulates bacterial resistance to CAMPs . 
PmrAB activity is dependent on PhoPQ , which acts through PmrD post-transcriptionally to activate the PmrAB system [ 27 ] . 
A comparison of the expression proﬁles of the PhoPQ -- SlyA and PmrAB regulons showed no overlap [ 25 ,28 ] . 
Overall , these studies suggest that alternative and complex overlapping regulatory networks have evolved to enable survival of Salmonella in the intracellular and intestinal environments . 
Intracellular Salmonella transcriptomics
One of the most fascinating and potentially therapeuti-cally-important applications of Salmonella transcriptomics is to improve our understanding of how Salmonella adapts and survives in the intracellular environment of mamma-lian cells . 
During its vacuolar sojourn , Salmonella is presented with many different stresses and has to evade a variety of host cell defence mechanisms , including an initial toxic oxidative burst followed by the production of antibacterial nitrogen species [ 29 ] . 
The ﬁrst intracellular Salmonella transcriptomic study to be published , involved infection of a cultured murine macrophage cell line with S. typhimurium [ 30 ] . 
Salmonella 
RNA samples were taken for microarray analysis at four , eight and 12 hours postinfection . 
These time points related to speciﬁc stages of infection . 
At four hours , the Salmonella are contained within a protective vacuole ( the Salmonella-containing vacuole , SCV ) and are beginning to divide ; toxic nitric oxide production begins at eight hours and is well established by 12 hours . 
This investigation discovered that expression of 919 out of 4451 S. typhimur-ium genes changed four hours after infection of macro-phages , compared with S. typhimurium grown in cell culture medium . 
Only a few genes were differentially regulated between four hours and 12 hours , suggesting that initial bacterial sensing controls most alterations in gene expression required for intracellular growth and survival . 
Particularly striking was the ﬁnding that 408 of the 919 genes are function unknown ( FUN ) genes , which suggests that there is much more to be discovered concerning the intracellular adaptation of Salmonella [ 31 ] . 
The study also identiﬁed several hitherto unknown genes which might have important roles in S. typhimurium pathogenesis ( STM2839 -- 2841 and STM3117 -- 3120 ) . 
Other interesting information that emerged from this study was the observation that gene expression patterns can act as sensors of the intracellular environment . 
For example , genes involved in Mg acquisition were highly 2 + upregulated , conﬁrming that intracellular Salmonella are starved for this ion in the SCV [ 32 ] . 
By analysing expression patterns of genes involved in other uptake systems and biosynthetic pathways , it was deduced that the intracellular environment is aerobic , low in phosphate , high in potassium , rich in amino acids and that gluconate and related carbohydrates might be a principal source of carbon for growth . 
The PNPase regulon has uniquely been determined both in vitro , in Luria -- Bertani ( LB ) broth , and during infection of macrophages [ 33 ] . 
It was found that the pnp mutation changes the expression of nine Salmonella genes inside macrophages , whereas expression of 109 genes were altered during in vitro growth in LB broth [ 13 ] . 
Notably , the spvABC virulence-associated genes were found to be upregulated in the S. typhimurium pnp mutant strain in macrophages . 
This suggests a basis for the persistent infection phenotype of the S. typhimurium pnp mutant in mice . 
The fact that tenfold more genes were regulated by PNPase during in vitro growth rather than during macrophage infection will have profound ramiﬁcations for the deﬁnition of regulons in the future . 
New insights from transcriptomic data comparisons
The availability of global transcriptional proﬁles gives individual published studies a new type of added value for the Salmonella research community . 
For example , once particular regulons have been deﬁned in vitro , the relevant genes can be monitored during infection by analysis of the transcriptome deﬁned for mammalian cells . 
Using this approach , we have now completed the ﬁrst analysis of the in vitro-deﬁned CsrA , SlyA and PhoPQ regulons , and the bile and polymyxin stimulons during macrophage infection by S. typhimurium ( Figure 1 ) . 
Of 93 CsrA-induced genes identiﬁed in vitro , we found that 88 % were downregulated during infection of J774A .1 macrophages by S. typhimurium ; consistent with this , csrA was also downregulated threefold ( Figure 1 ) [ 19,30 ] . 
We examined the expression of polymyxin-induced and repressed genes in intracellular S. typhimurium ( data from [ 22 ] ) ; 75 % of the 381 polymyxin-induced genes were upregulated and 80 % of the 373 polymyxin-repressed genes were downregulated during macrophage infection . 
This comparison underscores the important role of CAMPs in host cell defence mechanisms of phagocytic cells [ 22 ] . 
A similar comparison was performed using the bile stimulon of S. typhimurium [ 20 ] . 
We examined the expression of 85 genes that were downregulated after a 30 min exposure to bile to the intracellular S. typhimurium transcriptome ( data from [ 20 ] ) . 
Surprisingly , 88 % of the 85 genes were downregulated in Salmonella from infected J774 macrophages , including several SPI1 and ﬂagella genes . 
immediately halted at the precise time point that the sample is taken , as a result of the extremely short half-life of bacterial mRNA . 
In our hands , this is achieved for Salmonella with a simple solution of phenol and ethanol [ 35 ] . 
To ensure reproducibility between in vitro experiments , bacterial growth conditions should be carefully standardised . 
For example , we use identical ﬂask sizes , culture volumes and shaking speeds in water baths cap-able of tight temperature control ( 0.1 8C ) . 
One strategy that aids the comparison of transcriptomic data between experiments is the common reference or indirect approach involving dual dye-labelled microarray hybridizations [ 36,37 ] . 
Here , one of the dyes is used to label a reference nucleic acid , which is used in all experiments . 
The reference might be cDNA , reverse transcribed from a pool of RNA and used for all experiments , or , more conveniently , genomic DNA from the relevant bacterium . 
The expression data from different experiments can then be normalised to appropriate controls and subjected to clustering analysis , and compared using a variety of algorithms to form a ` compen-dium ' of related gene expression proﬁles . 
The ﬁrst compendium database of this kind was deﬁned for yeast [ 38 ] and a Salmonella compendium based on common reference experiments that have deﬁned the major regulons and stimulons , as well as several intracellular growth conditions , is being constructed . 
This represents a growing resource for examining regulatory mechanisms and transcriptional networks , and deﬁning operon structure . 
One of the advantages of comparisons between experiments is that it is possible to choose expression proﬁles from different growth conditions as a comparator . 
The expression proﬁles from the test conditions are normal-ised to the expression proﬁle of a comparator condition using microarray analysis software such as GeneSpring TM ( Silicon Genetics ) . 
To avoid erroneous expression levels caused by normalising expression proﬁles to that of a comparator , an examination of un-normalised transcript levels should always be made to determine whether the data are a true reﬂection of biologically relevant differential gene expression . 
It is also important to consider the precise growth conditions and nutrient availability in the comparator condition because the level of gene expression in the comparator might mask low or high expression in the test condition . 
For example , the initial analysis of intracellularly regulated genes of S. typhimurium during macro-phage infection used the expression proﬁle from bacteria grown in RPMI tissue-culture media as a comparator , and identiﬁed 919 S. typhimurium genes that were up - or downregulated in macrophages [ 30 ] . 
It was subsequently discovered that growth in RPMI media had a dramatic effect upon the S. typhimurium transcriptome , including induction of Fe - regulated genes . 
Therefore , the intra-2 + cellular gene expression data were analysed with a new comparator : the transcriptome from bacteria growing exponentially in vitro in LB media . 
This approach identiﬁed 1248 S. typhimurium genes that were up - or downregulated during infection of macrophages [ 39 ] . 
Analytical challenges
Transcriptomic data hold promise for developing our understanding of Salmonella virulence and regulation ; however , we will need to rise to a new set of interesting challenges concerning both experimental approaches and computational biology to make optimal use of the data . 
It has not yet been possible to determine the transcriptome of Salmonella from animal infection models . 
This is lar-gely because of the problem of extracting bacterial RNA from complex mammalian environments . 
In addition , the optimisation of cDNA labelling techniques and the development of methods selectively to amplify bacterial RNA in a linear fashion will be important [ 40 ] . 
Computational tools are now being developed to analyse transcriptional regulatory networks . 
Various clustering techniques based on expression patterns can be used with sequence comparison software to determine upstream regulatory motifs which are useful for deﬁning sets of coregulated genes [ 41 ] . 
Another promising computational approach involves the conceptualisation of complex transcriptional regulatory networks as a combination of a ` parts list ' ( e.g. transcription factors , binding sites and promoters ) and a ` topology model ' ( a graph of how the parts interrelate ) ; this information can then be used to infer regulatory modules [ 42 ] . 
The parts list can be determined from resources such as BioCyc ( http://biocyc.org ) , which makes gene function and operon predictions , and the transcription factor prediction database , DBD ( http://www.transcriptionfactor.org ) . 
DBD detects distant sequence homologies to known DNA-binding domains , and , to date , 151 genomes have been analysed [ 43 ] . 
Obtaining the ` parts list ' for Salmonella remains a challenge because 30 % of the Salmonella genome comprises FUN genes [ 31 ] ; however , DBD has now deﬁned 285 , 264 and 420 DNA-binding transcription factors from S. typhimurium : LT2 , S. typhi CT18 and S. typhi Ty2 , respectively . 
Transcriptomic data have been used to identify regulatory modules and module networks from yeast [ 44 ] , and the Genomica software tool ( http://genie.rockefeller.edu/ genomica/index . 
html ) will enable users to create module maps for Salmonella . 
A further promising computational development is to use gene expression proﬁles to identify distinct transcriptional subnetworks ( called origons ) ; in E. coli , it has been shown that origons are responsible for environmental perturbation processing [ 45 ] . 
Origons might provide further insight into transcriptional control than modulons ; all nodes within a modulon must be controlled by a common regulator , whereas in the origon they can be controlled indirectly by diffusion of altered transcriptional levels through the network [ 45 ] . 
For transcriptomics to bring insight into the mechanisms that underlie regulatory networks , it is necessary to decipher whether transcriptional effects are direct or indirect , for which the chromatin immunoprecipitation approach is ideal [ 46 ,47 ] . 
The next few years will bring a huge increase in the amount of useful information that lies untapped in transcriptomic databases ; sophisticated computational approaches such as that described above will prove invaluable in the effort to make the most of these data and to understand Salmonella regulatory interactions and the basis for virulence in this complex intracellular pathogen . 
Acknowledgements
28 . 
Monsieurs P , De Keersmaecker S , Navarre WW , Bader MW , De Smet F , McClelland M , Fang FC , De Moor B , Vanderleyden J , Marchal K : Comparison of the PhoPQ regulon in Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium . 
J Mol Evol 2005 , 60:462 -474 . 
The authors compared the composition of the PhoPQ regulon in E. coli and S. typhimurium using a combination of expression experiments and motif data . 
Their results suggest that the PhoPQ system has acquired a specialised function during evolution of these closely related bacteria . 
organisational levels . 
FEBS Lett 2005 , 579:1859 -1866 . 
These authors provide a clear discussion of the approaches used , and future challenges in modelling gene networks . 
The article highlights the gap that exists between network topology and control-logic/dynamic models , due , in part , to the challenge of identifying modules . 
45 . 
Balázsi G , Barabási AL , Oltvai ZN : Topological units of environmental signal processing in the transcriptional regulatory network of Escherichia coli . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005 , 102:7841 -7846 . 
The authors describe how the transcriptional network of E. coli , partly deﬁned with microarray data , is used to deﬁne origons , which represent regulatory subnetworks that originate at distinct classes of sensor transcription factors . 
The identiﬁed features are likely to represent a general framework for environmental signal processing in prokaryotes , which will be important for Salmonella biology . 
46 . 
Grainger DC , Overton TW , Reppas N , Wade JT , Tamai E , Hobman JL , Constantinidou C , Struhl K , Church G , Busby SJW : Genomic studies with Escherichia coli MelR protein : applications of chromatin immunoprecipitation and microarrays . 
J Bacteriol 2004 , 186:6938 -6943 . 
Here , the authors use chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis combined with microarrays to study the global distribution of a transcription factor ( MelR ) across a bacterial chromosome . 
This approach , combined with expression proﬁles of wild-type and mutant bacteria will be a powerful tool for differentiating direct and indirect regulation by a global regulator .