I Public A
Abstract 
Phosphorus is an essential nutrient for all living organisms . 
Under conditions of inorganic phosphate starvation , genes from the Pho regulon are induced allowing microorganisms to use phosphonates as a source of phosphorus . 
The phnO gene was previously annotated as a transcriptional regulator of unknown function due to sequence homology with members of the GCN5-related N-acyltransferase family ( GNAT ) . 
PhnO can now be functionally annotated as an aminoalkylphosphonic acid N-acetyltransferase which is able to acetylate a range of aminoalkylphosphonic acids . 
Studies revealed that PhnO proceeds via an ordered , sequential kinetic mechanism with acetyl-CoA binding first followed by aminoalkylphosphonate . 
Attack by the amine on the thioester of AcCoA generates the tetrahedral intermediate that collapses to generate the products . 
The enzyme also requires a divalent metal ion for activity , which is the first example of this requirement for a GNAT family member . 
Phosphorus plays an essential role in the physiology and biochemistry of all living organisms . 
It is therefore not surprising that microorganisms have evolved sophisticated systems to acquire phosphorus from sources other than inorganic orthophosphate . 
Under phosphate starvation conditions , when other more readily utilizable forms of phosphate are not present , microorganisms have evolved to utilize more reduced organophosphorus sources , including phosphonates ( 1 ) . 
Phosphonates are a class of compounds which contain a carbon-phosphorus ( C-P ) bond that is exceptionally stable and resistant to chemical hydrolysis , thermal decomposition and photolysis ( 2 ) . 
Phosphonates are a naturally occurring class of compound which are present in a number of organisms ; e.g. Tetrahymena which possesses up to 30 % of its membrane lipids in the form of phosphonolipids ( 3 ) . 
Changing the source of phosphorus from orthophosphate to organophosphorus compounds is a tightly regulated process . 
Under phosphate starvation conditions , genes from the Pho ( phosphate starvation ) regulon are induced ( 1 ) . 
In Gram-negative organisms , like Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium , the pho genes are regulated by a two-component system , which consists of PhoB and PhoR ; PhoB binds directly to the pho gene promoter whilst PhoR is a Pi sensory histidine protein kinase ( 4 ) . 
Two alternative pathways exist for cleavage of the C-P bond : the C-P lyase and the phosphonatase pathways ( Scheme 1 ; ( 5 ) . 
Escherichia coli carries genes for the reductive C-P lyase pathway ( 6 ) , whilst S. enterica carries genes for the phosphonatase pathway ( 7 ) . 
The C-P lyase pathway has a much broader substrate specificity and is able to cleave alkylphosphonates as well as aminoalkylphosphonates ( 8,9 ) . 
In comparison , the phosphonatase pathway has much narrower substrate specificity and acts only on 2-aminoethylphosphonate ( 10 ) . 
Mutagenic studies and sequence analysis of the Pho regulon in Escherichia coli identified a number of genes involved in phosphonate catabolism designated phnC to phnP ( 11,12 ) . 
PhnC , PhnD , and PhnE were proposed to constitute a phosphonate transporter while PhnG , PhnH , PhnI , PhnJ , PhnK , PhnL , and PhnM were required for catalysis and were proposed to form a membrane-associated carbon-phosphorus ( C-P ) lyase . 
PhnN and PhnP were not absolutely required for phosphonate catabolism and were therefore proposed to be accessory proteins for the C-P lyase . 
PhnF and PhnO were non-essential and were proposed to play regulatory roles because of sequence similarities to other regulatory proteins ( 11 ) . 
In contrast to the E. coli Pho regulon which consists of at least 31 co-regulated genes , the S. enterica Pho regulon is smaller consisting of only 21 genes ( 7 ) . 
The S. enterica Phn locus differs from the E. coli Phn locus in its size , layout and composition , primarily due to their differing mechanisms of phosphonate catabolism . 
The S. enterica Phn locus is composed of seven genes , designated phnR to phnX although another cluster containing three genes designated phnA , phnB and phnO is putatively involved in phosphonate catabolism ( Scheme 1 ; ( 7,13 ) . 
Unlike the C-P lyase pathway , the phosphonatase pathway has been extensively mechanistically characterized ( 7,10,14,15 ) . 
The initial step in the catabolism of 2-aminoethylphosphonate in S. enterica is a PLP-dependent transamination , carried out by 2-aminoethylphosphonate transaminase ( the phnW gene product ; ( 10 ) . 
This is followed by a metal-dependent hydrolysis of the C-P bond catalyzed by 2-phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase ( the phnX gene product ; ( 16,17 ) . 
Interestingly the phnO gene is present in both E. coli and S. enterica , even though they have very different mechanisms of phosphonate catabolism ( 6,7 ) . 
Gene knockout studies have shown that the E. coli phnO gene product was not required for the catabolism of phosphonates and was presumed to play a regulatory role ( 11 ) . 
Furthermore , phnO showed significant sequence homology to the GCN5 related N-acetyltransferases family ( GNAT ) , of which some members such as the histone acetyltransferases play a regulatory role ( 18 ) . 
In this paper , we describe the cloning , expression , and purification of PhnO from S. enterica serovar Typhimurium LT2 and define its functionality as an aminoalkylphosphonic acid N-acetyltransferase . 
We have determined the steady-state kinetic parameters , defined the divalent metal ion dependency and explored the steady-state kinetic mechanism . 
General acid catalysis is used by the enzyme , and this is likely to be the rate-limiting step as assessed by solvent deuterium kinetic isotope effects . 
All chemicals , acetyl-coenzyme A ( CoA ) , and aminoalkylphosphonic acids were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co or Fisher Scientific . 
pET-17b ( - ) plasmid was purchased from Novagen . 
All restriction enzymes and T4 DNA ligase were obtained from New England Biolabs . 
Escherichia coli strain BL21 ( DE3 ) star cells , PCR primers and the pCR-Blunt plasmid kit was obtained from Invitrogen . 
Pfu DNA polymerase was purchased from Stratagene . 
DesulfoCoA was synthesized as previously described ( 19 ) . 
All divalent metals used in this study were prepared from their respective chloride salt . 
Solution pH values were measured at 25 °C with an Accumet model 20 pH meter and Accumet combination electrode standardized at pH 7.0 and 4.0 or 10.0 . 
Protein purification was performed at 4 °C using a fast protein liquid chromatography system ( Amersham-Pharmacia 
Biotech ) . 
Spectrophotometric assays were performed using a UVIKON XL double beam UV-vis spectrophotometer ( BIO-TEK Instruments ) . 
All buffers were passed through Chelex 100 resin ( Bio Rad ) to remove any divalent metal ions present . 
The S. enterica serovar Typhimurium LT2 gene phnO was amplified by PCR using the primers 5-TTTTTCATATGCCAGTCTGTGAATTACGCCA-3 and 5-TTTTTTGAATTCTCACAATGCTTTCGTAAACC-3 from the plasmid template pET-28a ( - ) : phnO ( generously provided by Sophie Magnet , Albert Einstein College of Medicine ) , incorporating NdeI and EcoRI restriction endonuclease sites ( underlined ) . 
The amplified DNA product was ligated into a pCR-Blunt plasmid and transformed into One Shot TOP10 cells . 
Plasmid DNA isolated from these cells was then digested with NdeI and EcoRI , and the purified insert was ligated into purified plasmid pET-17b ( - ) previously linearized with the same restriction enzymes , yielding an expression plasmid for S.enterica phnO . 
The plasmid pET-17b ( - ) : phnO was then isolated , sequenced , and used to transform E. coli BL21 ( DE3 ) star cells . 
Transformed cells were grown overnight in 50 ml of LB broth containing 100 μg / ml ampicillin . 
One-liter cultures were then inoculated , the cells were grown at 37 °C to an A600 of 0.8 . 
Cells and were then induced by the addition of 0.5 mM isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside ( IPTG ) and left to grow for a further 16 h at 37 °C . 
Soluble expression of the protein was confirmed by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( SDS-PAGE ) . 
All protein purification steps were carried out at 4 °C . 
The cell pellet ( 30 g ) was resuspended in 50 ml of buffer A ( Buffer A ; 20 mM CHES , pH 8.75 ) , containing two tablets of Complete protease inhibitor cocktail ( Roche ) . 
The cells were disrupted on ice by sonication using a Branson Sonifier 450 . 
The suspension was then centrifuged ( 10,000 g for 30 min ) to remove cell debris . 
The supernatant was filtered using a 0.2 μm Millipore syringe filter and applied to a 140 ml Fast Flow Q-Sepharose anion-exchange column pre-equilibrated with buffer A . 
The proteins were eluted with a linear , one liter gradient of NaCl ( 0 to 1 M NaCl ) in buffer A volumes at 1 ml/min . 
Protein was detected with an on-line detector monitoring A280 , and column fractions were collected and analyzed by SDS-PAGE . 
Fractions containing the ca. 16 kDa protein were pooled and ( NH4 ) 2SO4 was added to a final concentration of 1.5 M . 
After centrifugation to remove insoluble material , the supernatant was applied to a 140 ml Phenyl Sepharose column pre-equilibrated with buffer C ( 20 mM CHES , pH 8.75 , 1.5 M ( NH4 ) 2SO4 ) . 
Proteins were eluted with a linear , one liter 1.5 - 0 M ( NH4 ) 2SO4 gradient at 1 ml/min . 
The active fractions were pooled and dialyzed extensively against buffer A . 
The sample was then applied to a 25 ml Mono-Q column anion-exchange column pre-equilibrated with buffer A , and proteins were eluted with a linear 750 ml gradient of NaCl ( 0 to 1 M NaCl ) in buffer A at 1 ml/min . 
The active fractions were pooled and dialyzed four times against 4 liters of buffer D ( Buffer D ; 20 mM HEPES 10 mM EDTA , 100 mM ( NH4 ) 2SO4 , pH 8.25 ) and concentrated using a YM10 Amicon ultrafiltration membrane to a final concentration of 20 mg/ml and stored in 50 % glycerol at -20 °C . 
The enzyme concentration was determined from ε 280 nm = 17780 M-1 cm-1 for native PhnO , and turnover numbers are based on an enzyme monomer . 
The concentration of enzyme was also determined using the bicinchoninic acid protein assay ( Pierce ) with bovine serum albumin as a standard , which agreed favorably with the value obtained by A280 . 
Initial velocities for the reaction of PhnO were determined using 4,4 ′ - dithiodipyridine ( DTDP ) to continuously detect the formation of the product CoA at 324 nm ( thiopyridone : ε = 19,800 M-1 cm-1 ) at 25 °C A typical reaction mix contained 100 mM HEPES , pH 7.5 , 100 mM ( NH4 ) 2SO4 , 200 μM DTDP , 1 mM AcCoA , and 2 mM aminoalkylphosphonate in a final volume of 1 ml . 
Reactions were initiated by the addition of enzyme , typically 2 nM final concentration . 
100 μM Ni2 + was typically included because a divalent metal is essential for activity . 
Initial velocity kinetic data were fitted using Sigma Plot 2000 . 
The substrate specificity of PhnO was determined at pH 7.5 at 10 different concentrations of the variable substrate and a fixed , saturating concentration of the second substrate and at saturating concentrations of Ni2 + [ 100 μM ] . 
Kinetic constants for acetyl-CoA and other CoA derivatives were determined at fixed saturating concentrations of ( S ) -1 - aminoethylphosphonic acid ( S-1AEP ) [ 3 mM ] and Ni2 + , whilst kinetic constants for the aminoalkylphosphonates were determined using fixed , saturating concentrations of acetyl-CoA [ 1 mM ] and Ni2 + . 
Kinetic constants for divalent metal ions were determined at fixed saturating concentrations of S-1AEP and acetyl-CoA . 
Individual substrate saturation kinetic data were fitted to Eq . 
1 where V is the maximal velocity , A is the substrate concentration , and K is the MichaelisMenten constant ( Km ) . 
Initial velocity patterns were obtained by measuring the initial rate at five concentrations of each substrate . 
Eq . 
2 was used to fit the intersecting initial velocity pattern , where A and B are the concentrations of the substrates , KA and KB are the Michaelis-Menten constants for the substrates and Kia is the inhibition constant for substrate A. 
Dead-end inhibition patterns were determined by measuring initial velocities ( < 10 % completion ) at variable concentrations of one reactant , the second reactant concentration fixed at its Km value , a fixed , saturating concentration of Ni2 + and the inhibitor at several concentrations . 
Eq . 
3 and 4 were used to fit linear , competitive and linear noncompetitive inhibition data , respectively , where I is the inhibitor concentration and Kis and Kii are the slope and intercept inhibition constants , respectively . 
The pH dependence of the kinetic parameters exhibited by PhnO were determined using S-1AEP as the variable substrate . 
Acetyltransferase activity was monitored from pH 6.75 to 8.5 every ∼ 0.5 pH unit using the following buffers : PIPES ( pH 6.75-7 .35 ) and HEPES ( pH 7.15-8 .5 ) . 
The resulting kinetic data were fitted to Eq .1 to obtain the kinetic parameters ; kcat and kcat/Km . 
Profiles were generated by plotting the log of kcat or kcat/Km versus the pH and fitted using Eq . 
7 and 8 , where y is kcat or kcat/Km , C is the pH-independent value of k + cat or kcat/Km , H is [ H ] and K represents the observed dissociation constant ( s ) for the ionizing group ( s ) . 
The solvent kinetic isotope effects on kcat and kcat/Km were determined by measuring the initial velocities using saturating concentrations of acetyl-CoA and Ni2 + whilst varying the concentration of S-1AEP in either H2O or 90 % D2O at pH 8.15 . 
Solvent deuterium kinetic isotope effects were fitted to Eq . 
9 , where EV/K and EV are the isotope effects on kcat/Km -1 and kcat -1 , respectively and Fi represents the fraction of isotope 
To obtain large quantities of PhnO for mechanistic studies , the phnO gene was cloned into plasmid pET-17b ( - ) and expressed in E. coli BL21 ( DE3 ) star cells . 
PhnO was purified using a combination of anion exchange/hydrophobic interaction column chromatographies . 
These methods were sufficient to achieve a catalytically active protein that was greater than 95 % homogeneous ( as judged by SDS-PAGE ) . 
Approximately 200 mg of purified enzyme was obtained from 30 g of cell paste . 
Protein electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry was performed on the purified protein , revealing a single species with a molecular mass of 16,499 Da , compared to 16,632 Da expected for full length PhnO , indicating that the N-terminal N-formyl-methionine has been posttranslationally removed . 
Dynamic light scattering was performed on the protein sample revealing that the protein existed as dimer ( data not shown ) . 
The substrate specificity of S. . 
enterica PhnO for acyl-CoA derivatives , summarized in Table 1 was determined at fixed saturating concentrations of S-1AEP and Ni2 + . 
On the basis of kcat / Km values and the probability that acetyl-CoA was the likely physiologically relevant substrate , acetyl-CoA was used as the acyl donor in all subsequent experiments . 
The kinetic parameters of various aminoalkylphosphonic acids determined at fixed saturating concentrations of acetylCoA and Ni2 + are also summarized in Table 1 . 
The kinetic behavior of the aminoalkylphosphonic acid followed two clear patterns . 
Increasing the alkyl chain from ethyl to butyl resulted in approximately a 70-fold increase in the Km values and 13-fold decrease in kcat values , indicating a preference for shorter aminoalkylphosphonic acids . 
The kinetic data also suggested that the position of the amine group was important with a preference for the 1 position . 
The kcat/Km value for S-1AEP was 15-fold higher than 2-aminoethyl phosphonic acid , primarily being an effect on the Km value . 
The selectivity for the phosphonic acid group was also investigated . 
Replacement with a carboxyl group , yielding D-alanine , yielded a very poor substrate for which saturation could not be obtained . 
For D-alanine , only an observed kcat/Km of 3.0 × 101 M-1 sec could be calculated , some 2600-fold lower than the kcat/Km observed for S-1AEP . 
Mimics of the phosphonate group were also investigated with aminoalkylsulfinic ( SO2H ) and aminoalkylsulfonic ( SO3H ) acids . 
Approximately a five-fold decrease of kcat / Km values were observed with respect to their corresponding phosphonic acid ( 2-aminoethyl phosphonic acid ) and this is primarily a Km effect . 
Various divalent metal ions were examined as activators for PhnO . 
Other enzymes involved in phosphonate catabolism have shown a metal ion dependency , most notably 2-phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase ( phosphonatase ) , which requires magnesium for coordination of the phosphonate ( 17 ) . 
To investigate whether a tightly-bound metal ion was playing a similar role to that observed in phosphonatase , following the final Mono Q column , PhnO was dialyzed extensively against buffer D in the presence and absence of 10 mM EDTA . 
Following dialysis with EDTA , PhnO was assayed in the absence of any divalent metal ions . 
The observed kcat/Km for S-1AEP decreased dramatically after EDTA treatment to 7.2 × 102 M-1 sec-1 , this being primarily being a Km effect ( Table 2 ) . 
In contrast when PhnO was extensively dialyzed against buffer alone , the observed kcat/Km value was 4.6 × 104 M-1 sec-1 , or half the value determined in the presence of saturating divalent metal ion . 
This suggests that the enzyme retains half an equivalent of tightly bound divalent metal ion throughout the purification . 
The metal ion specificity of EDTA-treated PhnO was examined as a function of both the metal ion at fixed , saturating concentrations of acetyl-CoA and S-1AEP and the amino phosphonate at fixed concentrations of acetyl-CoA and divalent metal ions ( Table 2 ) . 
The resulting hyperbolic curves ( data not shown ) were fitted to Eq . 
1 to obtain a maximal kcat and Km values and in the case of the metal ions , the parameter Kact , which is defined as the concentration of divalent metal ion required to half saturate the rate . 
The S. enterica PhnO exhibited a preference for Ni2 + followed by Mn2 + and very poor activity with Mg2 + , as evaluated by the kcat/Kact values , however it is unclear what the physiologically relevant metal ion activator is and further studies are required . 
Reactions catalyzed by GNAT acetyltransferases are known to proceed through two distinct mechanisms ( 18 ) . 
Only the ESA1 histone acetyltransferase has been shown to proceed via a ping-pong mechanism , with the transfer of the acetyl group from acetyl-CoA to a cysteinyl residue of the enzyme and the subsequent transfer to the ε-amino group of the histone lysine residue ( 20 ) . 
The other is a sequential mechanism , where a ternary complex of enzyme , acetylCoA , and substrate forms and the acetyl group of acetyl-CoA is directly transferred to a substrate . 
Reactions catalyzed by all other GNAT superfamily members studied so far , proceed through such a sequential kinetic mechanism ( 18 ) . 
The initial velocity patterns were determined using S-1AEP and acetyl-CoA at five different concentrations , respectively , and at a fixed , saturating concentration of Ni2 + . 
The resultant double-reciprocal plot was intersecting , diagnostic of a sequential kinetic mechanism in which both substrates must bind to the enzyme before chemistry can take place ( Figure 1 ) . 
Dead-end inhibition experiments were carried out using desulfocoenzyme A versus either acetyl-CoA or S-1AEP . 
Desulfocoenzyme A is a coenzyme A analogue that lacks the terminal sulfhydryl of CoA and is a dead-end inhibitor since it forms a non-productive complex with PhnO and the aminophosphonic acid . 
Desulfocoenzyme A exhibited linear , competitive inhibition versus acetyl-CoA ( Kis : 79 ± 3 μM ) and linear , noncompetitive inhibition versus S-1AEP ( Kis : 219 ± 44 μM ; Kii : 204 ± : 33 μM ) . 
These dead-end inhibition patterns are only compatible with the ordered binding of acetylCoA followed by S-1AEP , as has been observed with other GNAT acetyltransferases ( 18 ) . 
pH studies were performed to investigate the ionization behavior of groups responsible for catalysis and binding . 
The pH depencency of kcat and kcat/KmS -1 AEP were investigated at saturating concentrations of acetyl-CoA and Ni2 + . 
The kcat pH profile revealed the presence a single ionizable group exhibiting a pK value of 8.2 ( ± 0.1 ) . 
We ascribed this group to an enzymic group that functions as a general acid involved in protonation of the initially formed thiolate after tetrahedral intermediate collapse . 
The kcat/KmS -1 AEP profile reveals two groups with similar pK values of 7.5 ( ± 0.1 ) ( Figure 2 ) . 
The two similar pKa 's are likely to be ionizable groups from the aminoalkylphosphonate substrate , most likely the amine and the phosphonoxygen groups ( both have pKa values around 7 ; ( 21 ) ) , both of which are unprotonated when S-1AEP binds to the E-acetyl-CoA complex . 
From these data a chemical mechanism can be proposed where after ordered substrate binding , a tetrahedral intermediate is formed followed by intermediate collapse and protonation of the CoA thiolate ( Scheme 2 ) . 
The exact role of the metal ion is unclear , but could bind to the enzyme and aid in the binding of the aminoalkylphosphonate by coordinating the oxygen 's of the phosphonate group in a similar fashion to which 2-phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase binds to Mg2 + ( 17 ) . 
However , we favor a role in which the metal binds to the enzyme , and the aminoalkylphosphonate contributes both the amine and one of the phosphonoxygens atoms as metal ligands , which is supported by the absence of any general base catalysis observed in the kcat pH profile . 
Preliminary isothermal titration calorimetry data suggest that metals can bind to the free enzyme ( data not shown ) . 
This could position the amine group of the aminoalkylphosphonate for acetyltransfer and reduce the pK of the amine , making it more nucleophilic for attack on the thioester ( such metal complexes of aminoalkylphosphonates have previous been described ( 22 ) ) . 
Solvent kinetic isotope effects were determined by measuring initial velocities in both H2O and 90 % D2O . 
Both acetyl-CoA and S-1AEP were investigated as the variable substrate at seven different concentrations , with reactions performed under fixed , saturating concentrations of the other substrate and Ni2 + . 
These experiments were performed at pH 8.15 where both kcat and kcat/Km are relatively independent of pH. When acetyl-CoA was the variable substrate , a D2Okcat/Kacetyl-CoA value of unity , and a D2Okcat value of 2.2 ( ± 0.1 ) were observed , implying that acetyl-CoA binds first , and its dissociation is prevented by S-1AEP binding . 
When S-1AEP was the variable substrate , equivalent solvent kinetic isotope effects of 2.2 ( ± 0.1 ) were observed on D2Okcat and D2Okcat/KS -1 AEP suggesting that S-1AEP is not a `` sticky substrate '' ( Figure 3 ) . 
These data are in agreement with the dead-end studies that suggested an ordered binding of acetyl-CoA followed by the aminoalkylphosphonate . 
A proton inventory experiment was performed by varying the atom fraction of D2O at saturating concentrations of both S-1AEP and acetyl-CoA using Ni2 + as the metal activator . 
Each data point was determined in triplicate , yielding a linear relation between the rate and mole fraction of deuterium ( data not shown ) . 
The equivalent values of D2Ok and D2O cat kcat / KS-1AEP and the linear proton inventory suggest that a single proton is transferred in a step that is at least partially rate-limiting in the chemical reaction catalyzed by PhnO . 
On the basis of the kcat pH profile , the most likely single proton transfer is from the enzymic general acid to the thiolate of CoA , formed upon decomposition of the tetrahedral intermediate . 
In the structures of a number of GNAT-substrate complexes , a suitably positioned tyrosine residue has been ascribed as the general acid ( 18 ) . 
Although we have demonstrated that PhnO functions as an aminoalkylphosphonic N-acetyltransferase , a number of questions still exist . 
PhnO acetylates a range of aminoalkylphosphonates , including the physiologically relevant 2-aminoethylphosphonic acid . 
The chemical and kinetic mechanisms proposed are similar to those proposed for other GNAT acetyltransferases , with the sequential binding of acetyl-CoA followed by the binding of the acyl acceptor ( the aminoalkylphosphonate ) , with subsequent formation of the tetrahedral intermediate and product release ( 23 ) . 
However , the divalent metal ion activation that was observed is , to date , unique for a GNAT acetyltransferase . 
It seems likely that the divalent metal ion activation has evolved to play a specific role in aminoalkylphosphonate binding similar to that observed in other enzymes involved in phosphonate catabolism ( phosphonatase ; 
( 17 ) . 
This would also serve to reduce the pK value of the amine and assist in catalysis . 
The physiological relevance of the PhnO catalyzed reaction is unclear , as acetylation of the amine group would prevent its transamination and subsequent cleavage of the C-P bond . 
We propose two physiological roles for aminoalkylphosphonate acetylation : storage and protection . 
When amounts of aminoalkylphosphonates are available in the environment that exceed the organisms phosphate requirements , these phosphonates can be stored in an acetylated form and later used after hydrolysis by a deacetylase . 
S-1AEP is known to have antibacterial properties ( 24 ) . 
S-1AEP is a structural analogue of D-alanine , a component of the muramyl-pentapeptide involved in the formation of Gram-negative cross-linked peptidoglycan . 
S-1AEP is a slow onset inhibitor of the S. enterica D-alanine :D - alanine ligase , exhibiting a Ki value of 0.5 mM ( 25 ) . 
S-1AEP is also a slow onset inhibitor of the Streptococcus faecalis alanine racemase ( 26 ) . 
Thus , PhnO , by acetylating S-1AEP , would protect against the deleterious effects of S-1AEP as a result of the inhibition of these two key enzymes in peptidoglycan biosynthesis . 
We thank Sophie Magnet ( AECOM ) for the generous donation of the S. enterica pET-28a ( - ) : phnO onstruct . 
The authors wish to thank Argyrides Argyrou for thoughtful discussions . 
1 . 
Vershinina OA , Znamenskaia LV . 
The Pho regulons of bacteria . 
Mikrobiologiia 2002 ; 71:581 -- 95 . 
[ PubMed : 12449623 ] 2 . 
Kononova SV , Nesmeyanova MA . 
Phosphonates and their degradation by microorganisms . 
Biochemistry ( Mosc ) 2002 ; 67:184 -- 95 . 
[ PubMed : 11952414 ] 3 . 
Kennedy KE , Thompson GA Jr. . 
Phosphonolipids : localization in surface membranes of Tetrahymena . 
Science 1970 ; 168:989 -- 91 . 
[ PubMed : 5441031 ] 4 . 
Conlin CA , Tan SL , Hu H , Segar T . 
The apeE gene of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium is induced by phosphate limitation and regulated by phoBR . 
J. Bacteriol 2001 ; 183:1784 -- 6 . 
[ PubMed : 11160112 ] 5 . 
Wanner BL . 
Molecular genetics of carbon-phosphorus bond cleavage in bacteria . 
Biodegradation 1994 ; 5:175 -- 84 . 
[ PubMed : 7765831 ] 6 . 
Metcalf WW , Wanner BL . 
Evidence for a fourteen-gene , phnC to phnP locus for phosphonate metabolism in Escherichia coli . 
Gene 1993 ; 129:27 -- 32 . 
[ PubMed : 8335257 ] 
7 . 
Jiang W , Metcalf WW , Lee KS , Wanner BL . 
Molecular cloning , mapping , and regulation of Pho regulon genes for phosphonate breakdown by the phosphonatase pathway of Salmonella typhimurium LT2 . 
J. Bacteriol 1995 ; 177:6411 -- 21 . 
[ PubMed : 7592415 ] 8 . 
Wackett LP , Shames SL , Venditti CP , Walsh CT. . 
Bacterial carbon-phosphorus lyase : products , rates , and regulation of phosphonic and phosphinic acid metabolism . 
J. Bacteriol 1987 ; 169:710 -- 7 . 
[ PubMed : 3804975 ] 9 . 
White AK , Metcalf WW . 
Two C-P lyase operons in Pseudomonas stutzeri and their roles in the oxidation of phosphonates , phosphite , and hypophosphite . 
J. Bacteriol 2004 ; 186:4730 -- 9 . 
[ PubMed : 15231805 ] 10 . 
Kim AD , Baker AS , Dunaway-Mariano D , Metcalf WW , Wanner BL , Martin BM . 
The 2-aminoethylphosphonate-specific transaminase of the 2-aminoethylphosphonate degradation pathway . 
J. Bacteriol 2002 ; 184:4134 -- 40 . 
[ PubMed : 12107130 ] 11 . 
Metcalf WW , Wanner BL . 
Mutational analysis of an Escherichia coli fourteen-gene operon for phosphonate degradation , using TnphoA ' elements . 
J. Bacteriol 1993 ; 175:3430 -- 42 . 
[ PubMed : 8388873 ] 12 . 
Metcalf WW , Wanner BL . 
Involvement of the Escherichia coli phn ( psiD ) gene cluster in assimilation of phosphorus in the form of phosphonates , phosphite , Pi esters , and Pi . 
J. Bacteriol 1991 ; 173:587 -- 600 . 
[ PubMed : 1846145 ] 13 . 
Kulakova AN , Kulakov LA , Akulenko NV , Ksenzenko VN , Hamilton JT , Quinn JP . 
Structural and functional analysis of the phosphonoacetate hydrolase ( phnA ) gene region in Pseudomonas fluorescens 23F . 
J. Bacteriol 2001 ; 183:3268 -- 75 . 
[ PubMed : 11344133 ] 14 . 
Dumora C , Marche M , Doignon F , Aigle M , Cassaigne A , Crouzet M. First characterization of the phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase gene of Pseudomonas aeruginosa . 
Gene 1997 ; 197:405 -- 12 . 
[ PubMed : 9332393 ] 15 . 
Baker AS , Ciocci MJ , Metcalf WW , Kim J , Babbitt PC , Wanner BL , Martin BM , Dunaway-Mariano D. Insights into the mechanism of catalysis by the P-C bond-cleaving enzyme phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase derived from gene sequence analysis and mutagenesis . 
Biochemistry 1998 ; 37:9305 -- 15 . 
[ PubMed : 9649311 ] 16 . 
Olsen DB , Hepburn TW , Lee SL , Martin BM , Mariano PS , Dunaway-Mariano D. Investigation of the substrate binding and catalytic groups of the P-C bond cleaving enzyme , phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase . 
Arch . 
Biochem . 
Biophys 1992 ; 296:144 -- 51 . 
[ PubMed : 1605625 ] 17 . 
Zhang G , Morais MC , Dai J , Zhang W , Dunaway-Mariano D , Allen KN . 
Investigation of metal ion binding in phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase identifies sequence markers for metal-activated enzymes of the HAD enzyme superfamily . 
Biochemistry 2004 ; 43:4990 -- 7 . 
[ PubMed : 15109258 ] 18 . 
Vetting MW , LP S. d. C. Yu M , Hegde SS , Magnet S , Roderick SL , Blanchard JS . 
Structure and functions of the GNAT superfamily of acetyltransferases . 
Arch . 
Biochem . 
Biophys 2005 ; 433:212 -- 26 . 
[ PubMed : 15581578 ] 19 . 
Chase JF , Middleton B , Tubbs PK . 
A coenzyme A analogue , desulpho-coA ; preparation and effects on various enzymes . 
Biochem . 
Biophys . 
Res . 
Commun 1966 ; 23:208 -- 13 . 
[ PubMed : 5928913 ] 20 . 
Yan Y , Harper S , Speicher DW , Marmorstein R . 
The catalytic mechanism of the ESA1 histone acetyltransferase involves a self-acetylated intermediate . 
Nat . 
Struct . 
Biol 2002 ; 9:862 -- 9 . 
[ PubMed : 12368900 ] 21 . 
Wozniak M , Nicole J , Tridot G. N ° 701 - Complexes du cuivre ( II ) et des acides α-aminoalkylphosphoniques : correlation entre acidites , facteurs steriques et pouvoir complexant . 
Bull . 
Soc . 
Chem 1972 ; 11:4445 -- 4452 . 
22 . 
Song B , Chen D , Bastian M , Martin BR , Sigel H. 155 . 
Metal-Ion-Coordination Properties of a Viral Inhibitor , a Pyrophosphate Analogue , and a Herbicide Metabolite , a Glycinate Analogue : The Solution Properties of the Potentially Five-Membered Chelates Derived from Phosphonoformic acid and ( Aminoethyl ) phosphonic acid . 
Helvetica Chem . 
Acta 1994 ; 77:1738 -- 1756 . 
23 . 
Draker KA , Northrop DB , Wright GD . 
Kinetic mechanism of the GCN5-related chromosomal aminoglycoside acetyltransferase AAC ( 6 ′ ) - Ii from Enterococcus faecium : evidence of dimer subunit cooperativity . 
Biochemistry 2003 ; 42:6565 -- 74 . 
[ PubMed : 12767240 ] 24 . 
Badet B , Inagaki K , Soda K , Walsh CT. . 
Time-dependent inhibition of Bacillus stearothermophilus alanine racemase by ( 1-aminoethyl ) phosphonate isomers by isomerization to noncovalent slowly dissociating enzyme - ( 1-aminoethyl ) phosphonate complexes . 
Biochemistry 1986 ; 25:3275 -- 82 . 
[ PubMed : 3730360 ] 25 . 
Duncan K , Walsh CT. . 
ATP-dependent inactivation and slow binding inhibition of Salmonella typhimurium d-alanine : d - alanine ligase ( ADP ) by ( aminoalkyl ) phosphinate and aminophosphonate analogues of d - alanine . 
Biochemistry 1988 ; 27:3709 -- 14 . 
[ PubMed : 3044448 ] 26 . 
Badet B , Walsh C. Purification of an alanine racemase from Streptococcus faecalis and analysis of its inactivation by ( 1-aminoethyl ) phosphonic acid enantiomers . 
Biochemistry 1985 ; 24:1333 -- 41 . 
[ PubMed : 3921052 ] 
Double reciprocal plot of initial rate data at varying S-1AEP concentrations and fixed concentrations of acetyl-CoA at 10 μM ( ♀ ) , 20 μM ( ○ ) , 30 μM ( ) , 60 μM ( → ) and 250 μM ( † ) . 
The pattern of intersecting lines is indicative of a sequential kinetic mechanism . 
Dependence of kcat and kcat/KS -1 AEP on pH at saturating levels of acetyl-CoA and Ni2 + . 
The dotted and solid lines are fits to Eqs 7 and 8 , respectively . 
The kcat pH profile revealed the presence a single ionizable group with a pK value of 8.2 ( ± 0.1 ) . 
The kcat/KS -1 AEP profile was fit to Eq . 
8 , which describes the dependence on 2 groups with similar pK values of 7.5 ( ± 0.1 ) and Eq . 
7 , which describes the dependence on 1 group ( dotted line ) . 
Reciprocal plots of the solvent kinetic isotope effect determined for PhnO using acetyl-CoA ( top panel ) or S-1AEP ( bottom panel ) as the variable substrate , in the presence of saturating concentrations of Ni2 + . 
The symbols are the experimentally determined values in H2O ( ♀ ) or 90 % D2O ( ) , while the lines are fits of the data to Eq . 
9 . ) 
Pathways for phosphonate catabolism . 
( I ) The C-P lyase pathway acts on alkylphosphonates as well as aminoalkylphosphonates . 
( II ) The phosphonatase pathway that uses 2-aminoethylphosphonate and cleaves the C-P bond in a two-step transamination and hydrolysis process . 
( III ) The S. enterica phn gene locus ; phnR encodes a putative aminoalkylphosphonate transport repressor , phnS-V encode putative aminoalkylphosphonate transport components , phnW encodes a 2-aminoethylphosphonate transaminase , phnX encodes a 2-phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase , phnA encodes a putative phosphonoacetate hydrolase , phnB encodes a putative phosphonoacetate transporter , phnO encodes an aminoalkylphosphonic N-acetyltransferase . 
Proposed kinetic and chemical mechanisms for aminophosphonate N-acetylation by PhnO