Microbiology ( 2006 ) , 152 , 1347 -- 1359 
DOI 10.1099 / mic.0.28744-0 
Identiﬁcation of the sE regulon enterica serovar Typhimurium
of Salmonella 
Henrieta Skovierova ,1 Gary Rowley ,2 Bronislava Rezuchova ,1 Dagmar Homerova ,1 Claire Lewis ,2 Mark Roberts2 and Jan Kormanec1 
1Institute of Molecular Biology , Centre of Excellence for Molecular Medicine , Slovak Academy of Science , Dubravska cesta 21 , 845 51 Bratislava , Slovak Republic 
Correspondence Jan Kormanec 
2Molecular Bacteriology Group , Institute of Comparative Medicine , Department of Veterinary Pathology , Glasgow University Veterinary School , Bearsden Road , Glasgow G61 1QH , UK 
jan.kormanec@savba.sk 
The extracytoplasmic function sigma factor , sE , has been shown to play a critical role in virulence of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium ( S. Typhimurium ) . 
The previously optimized two-plasmid system has been used to identify S. Typhimurium promoters recognized by RNA polymerase containing sE . 
This method allowed identiﬁcation of 34 sE-dependent promoters that direct expression of 62 genes in S. Typhimurium , 23 of which ( including several speciﬁc for S. Typhimurium ) have not been identiﬁed previously to be dependent upon sE in Escherichia coli . 
The promoters were conﬁrmed in S. Typhimurium and transcriptional start points of the promoters were determined by S1-nuclease mapping . 
All the promoters contained sequences highly similar to the consensus sequence of sE-dependent promoters . 
The identiﬁed genes belonging to the S. Typhimurium sE-regulon encode proteins involved in primary metabolism , DNA repair systems and outer-membrane biogenesis , and regulatory proteins , periplasmic proteases and folding factors , 
Received 5 December 2005 Revised 20 January 2006 
proposed lipoproteins , and inner - and outer-membrane proteins with unknown functions . 
Several of these sE-dependent genes have been shown to play a role in virulence of S. Typhimurium . 
Accepted 30 January 2006 
INTRODUCTION
Serovars of Salmonella enterica are intracellular pathogens of vertebrates that cause a wide spectrum of diseases . 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium ( S. Typhimurium ) causes a typhoid-like systemic infection in mice and enteritis in humans and other animals . 
Within its host and in the environment , Salmonella species , like other bacteria , are exposed to a wide variety of stresses . 
To survive these detrimental conditions , bacteria have evolved a number of stress response systems , including the so-called extracytoplasmic stress response ( ESR ) . 
In the related species Escherichia coli , the ESR has been shown to be governed by at least three partially overlapping signal transduction pathways : the CpxRA and BaeSR two-component systems and the extracytoplasmic function ( ECF ) sigma factor RpoE E ( s ) ( Ruiz & Silhavy , 2005 ) . 
The rpoE gene is located in an operon that includes three downstream genes , rseA , rseB and rseC . 
The E. coli rpoE gene is essential for cell viability and its expression is autoregulated and induced under conditions leading to the misfolding of periplasmic and outer-membrane proteins , such as heat-shock , and ethanol and osmotic stress . 
Abbreviations : ECF , extracytoplasmic function ; ESR , extracytoplasmic stress response ; EsE , RNA polymerase holoenzyme containing sE ; OPG , osmoregulated periplasmic glucan ( s ) ; OPP , oligopeptide permease ; TSP , transcription start point . 
The activity of s is controlled by its speciﬁc membrane-E bound anti-sigma factor , RseA , which , under non-stressed conditions , sequesters the majority of s . 
In response to outer-E membrane protein folding perturbations , RseA is cleaved by the successive action of two membrane proteases , DegS and YaeL ( RseP ) , liberating the complex into the cytoplasm where RseA is degraded , freeing s to complex with core E RNA polymerase to govern expression of s - dependent E genes ( reviewed by Alba & Gross , 2004 ) . 
Two independent molecular genetic approaches have previously identiﬁed 58 members of the E. coli s regulon , including periplasmic E proteases and folding factors , several phospholipids and lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) biosynthesis proteins , regulatory proteins , primary metabolism proteins and proteins with unknown function ( Dartigalongue et al. , 2001 ; Rezuchova et al. , 2003 ) . 
Recently , DNA microarray analysis after transient expression of rpoE in exponential - and early-stationary-phase E. coli has identiﬁed 156 genes that were signiﬁcantly upregulated , including the previously reported 31 s regu-E lon genes ( Kabir et al. , 2005 ) . 
This approach increased the number of genes in the s regulon to 183 , although many of E these may be indirectly dependent upon s ( Kabir et al. , 2005 ) . 
E 
Unlike in E. coli , the rpoE gene in S. Typhimurium is not essential for cell viability , even at high temperature . 
However , S. typhimurium s has been shown to be required E for oxidative stress resistance , stationary-phase survival and pathogenicity . 
S. Typhimurium rpoE mutants are defective in survival and proliferation in macrophage and epithelial cell lines , and are highly attenuated for virulence in a mouse model ( Humphreys et al. , 1999 ; Kenyon et al. , 2002 ; Testerman et al. , 2002 ) . 
The reduced virulence of the mutant is partially due to the increased sensitivity to reactive oxygen species produced by host macrophages ( Humphreys et al. , 1999 ; Testerman et al. , 2002 ) . 
S. Typhimurium s also E plays an important role in resistance to non-oxidative mammalian host defence mechanisms such as antimicrobial peptides ( Humphreys et al. , 1999 ; Crouch et al. , 2005 ) . 
Moreover , the S. Typhimurium rpoE gene has been shown to be up-regulated in S. Typhimurium within macrophages in vitro and murine tissues in vivo ( Eriksson et al. , 2003 ; Rollenhagen et al. , 2004 ) . 
These results indicate that the E genes of the s regulon should play roles in all these processes . 
Thus , identiﬁcation and characterization of the S. Typhimurium s regulon may reveal new genes involved in E the virulence and survival of S. Typhimurium in the host . 
0002-8744 G 
2006 SGM 
Although organization of the S. Typhimurium rpoE operon resembles its counterpart in E. coli , its regulation is slightly different . 
Expression of S. Typhimurium rpoE is governed by three promoters , including one , rpoEp3 , directly recognized by RNA polymerase holoenzyme containing s ( Es ) . 
Like E E its E. coli counterpart , the rpoEp3 promoter is partially induced by heat shock and osmotic stress , but it is most strongly induced by cold shock and entry into stationary E phase ( Miticka et al. , 2003 ) . 
By using the s - dependent rpoEp3 promoter , we optimized the previously established E. coli two-plasmid system for the identiﬁcation of promoters recognized by S. Typhimurium s . 
The S. Typhimurium E rpoE gene was cloned in an expression plasmid under the control of an inducible promoter and the rpoEp3 promoter was cloned upstream of a reporter gene in a compatible promoter-probe plasmid . 
The promoter was active in the E. coli two-plasmid system only after induced expression of S. Typhimurium rpoE , with a transcription start point ( TSP ) identical to that in S. Typhimurium ( Miticka et al. , 2003 ) . 
In the present paper , we have used this optimized E. coli two-plasmid system to identify and locate S. Typhimurium s-E dependent promoters directing expression of genes which belong to the S. Typhimurium s regulon . 
Moreover , the E deduced functions of the identiﬁed genes are discussed in relation to the virulence of S. Typhimurium . 
METHODS
Bacterial strains , plasmids and culture conditions . 
S. Typhimurium SL1344 ( Hoiseth & Stocker , 1981 ) was used for chromosomal DNA preparation . 
E. coli XL-1 Blue ( Stratagene ) was used as a host for cloning experiments . 
The E. coli plasmid pSB40 ( Park et al. , 1989 ) was kindly provided by Dr M. K. Winson , University of Nottingham . 
The expression plasmid pAC7 has been described by Rezuchova & Kormanec ( 2001 ) . 
Plasmid pAC-rpoEST4 containing the S. Typhimurium rpoE gene under the control of the arabinose-inducible PBAD promoter has been described by Miticka et al. ( 2003 ) . 
For RNA isolation , E. coli with the corresponding plasmids was inoculated in LB medium ( Ausubel et al. , 1995 ) supplemented with ampicillin ( 50 mg ml ) and chloramphenicol ( 40 mg ml ) and grown at 37 uC to exponential phase ( OD600 = 0 ? 
3 ) . 
Expression of S. Typhimurium rpoE was induced for 3 h with 0 ? 
0002 % ( w/v ) arabinose . 
To grow S. Typhimurium with rpoE artiﬁcially expressed for RNA isolation , S. Typhimurium SL1344 containing pAC-rpoEST4 or pAC7 ( as negative control ) were grown in LB with 40 mg chloramphenicol ml to exponential phase ( OD600 = 0 ? 
24 ) 21 and expression of rpoE was induced for 3 h with 0 ? 
2 % ( w/v ) arabinose . 
Conditions for E. coli growth and transformation were as described by Ausubel et al. ( 1995 ) . 
DNA manipulations . 
DNA manipulations in E. coli were performed as described by Ausubel et al. ( 1995 ) . 
Nucleotide sequencing was performed by the chemical method ( Maxam & Gilbert , 1980 ) and by the dideoxy chain-termination method ( Sanger et al. , 1977 ) , using a TaqTrack kit ( Promega ) . 
An S. Typhimurium SL1344 geno-mic library was prepared by cloning 0 ? 
5 -- 1 ? 
2 kb partial Sau3AI chromosomal DNA fragments into the BamHI site of pSB40 . 
About 120 000 original clones obtained from the transformation of E. coli XL-1 Blue were used for total plasmid isolation by using a Qiagen plasmid puriﬁcation kit . 
The clones were statistically checked for the presence of insert and all the picked clones contained fragments in the range 0 ? 
5 -- 1 ? 
2 kb . 
Detection of E. coli clones containing the rpoE-dependent promoter fragment . 
The S. Typhimurium SL1344 genomic library was transformed into E. coliXL-1 Blue containing the compatible plasmid pAC-rpoEST4 . 
The clones were selected on LBACX plates ( LB medium with 5 g lactose l , 100 mg ampicillin ml , 40 mg 21 21 21 21 chloramphenicol ml , 20 mg X-Gal ml ) with 2 mg arabinose 21 ml as described by Miticka et al. ( 2003 ) . 
The colonies were screened after 24 h growth at 37 uC . 
Blue clones were inoculated in parallel onto two LBACX plates containing either 2 mg arabinose ml ( LBACX-ARA ) or 2 mg glucose ml ( LBACX-GLU ) , respec-21 21 tively . 
Clones that were blue on LBACX-ARA and white on LBACX-GLU were inoculated into 1 ml LB with 100 mg ampicillin ml and 21 grown overnight at 37 uC . 
Cells were pelleted , resuspended in 200 ml STE buffer ( 0 ? 
1 M NaCl , 10 mM Tris/HCl , pH 8 , 1 mM EDTA ) with 0 ? 
5 mg lysozyme ml , incubated for 5 min at room tempera-21 ture , boiled for 1 ? 
5 min and centrifuged for 10 min at 16 000 g . 
One microlitre of supernatant was transformed in parallel into E. coli XL-1 Blue strains harbouring either pAC-rpoEST4 or pAC7 and plated onto LBACX-ARA . 
Isolation of RNA and S1-nuclease mapping . 
After ﬁnishing growth , cell suspensions of E. coli or S. Typhimurium were immediately poured into 50 ml Falcon tubes containing about 15 ml crushed ice prechilled to 280 uC , then the cells were centrifuged , washed with DEPC-treated ice-cold 0 ? 
15 M NaCl and total RNA was prepared as described by Kormanec ( 2001 ) . 
High-resolution S1-nuclease mapping was performed according to Kormanec ( 2001 ) . 
Samples ( 40 mg ) of RNA were hybridized to approximately 0 ? 
02 pmol of a suitable DNA probe labelled at one 59 end with [ c - P ] ATP [ approx . 
3 32 6106 c.p.m. ( pmol probe ) 21 ] and treated with 120 U S1-nuclease . 
The probes for S1-nuclease mapping of the proposed S. Typhimurium s - dependent promoters in the E. coli E two-plasmid system were prepared by PCR ampliﬁcation from the corresponding pEST plasmid ( pEST1-pEST124 ) isolated from the positive clone using the 59 end-labelled universal oligonucleotide primer 247 from the lacZa-coding region of the pEST plasmid , and primer mut80 from the 59 region ﬂanking the BamHI cloning site of pSB40 ( Table 1 ) . 
The probes for S1-nuclease mapping for in vivo veriﬁcation in S. Typhimurium were prepared by PCR ampliﬁcation from the corresponding pEST plasmid using the 59 end-labelled internal reverse primer from the corresponding coding region ( Table 1 ) , and the direct primer mut80 . 
Oligonucleotides were labelled at their 59 ends with [ c - P ] ( 4500 Ci mmol ; ICN ) and T4 poly-32 21 nucleotide kinase . 
The labelled DNA fragments were isolated from polyacrylamide gels as described by Kormanec ( 2001 ) . 
The RNA-protected DNA fragments were analysed on DNA sequencing gels together with G+A and T+C sequencing ladders derived from the end-labelled fragments ( Maxam & Gilbert , 1980 ) . 
21 21 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Identiﬁcation of the S. Typhimurium promoters E recognized by Es using the E. coli two-plasmid system 
To identify S. Typhimurium s - dependent promoters , we E used the optimized E. coli two-plasmid screening system that was successfully used for the identiﬁcation of the E. coli s regulon ( Rezuchova et al. , 2003 ) . 
This method assumes E that the E. coli RNA polymerase core enzyme will interact with a particular heterologous sigma factor expressed from one plasmid , and that the resulting holoenzyme can recognize a promoter present in a library of chromosomal fragments cloned in the second compatible plasmid , upstream of a reporter gene . 
This E. coli two-plasmid system was optimized using the S. Typhimurium s - dependent E rpoEp3 promoter . 
The S. Typhimurium rpoE gene was cloned into expression plasmid pAC7 under the control of an arabinose-inducible PBAD promoter , resulting in plasmid pAC-rpoEST4 . 
Following arabinose-induced expression of S. Typhimurium rpoE , E. coli RNA polymerase holoenzyme containing S. Typhimurium s ( Es ) was able to recog-E E nize the rpoEp3 promoter cloned upstream of the lacZa reporter gene in the second compatible plasmid . 
Moreover , the transcription of the rpoEp3 promoter was initiated from the identical TSP as in S. Typhimurium ( Miticka et al. , 2003 ) . 
These results indicated that this optimized E. coli two-plasmid system could be used for identiﬁcation of S. Typhimurium s - dependent promoters . 
For this pur-E pose , an S. Typhimurium genomic library cloned into pSB40 was used to transform E. coli XL-1 Blue containing pAC-rpoEST4 . 
After screening of about 120 000 colonies on LBACX-ARA plates , 5040 blue clones that represented promoters active in E. coli ( including s - dependent promoters ) E were picked up . 
After further selection of the identiﬁed blue clones on LBACX-ARA and LBACX-GLU plates , the plasmids were isolated from 1020 clones and transformed in parallel into E. coli XL-1 Blue with pAC7 and pAC-rpoEST4 , respectively . 
Colonies were screened on LBACX-ARA plates . 
Clones containing plasmids with s - dependent promoters E were blue in E. coli XL-1 Blue with pAC7-rpoEST4 and white in E. coli XL-1 Blue containing pAC7 . 
Clones with s-E independent promoters were blue in both strains . 
With this last screen we identiﬁed 124 positive clones containing putative s - dependent promoters ( plasmids pEST1 -- pEST124 ) . 
E Sequencing of the DNA fragments revealed 34 representatives . 
Although the quality of the library was high ( about 120 000 original clones correspond to a calculated probability greater than 0 ? 
99999 ) , we can not rule out that the S. Typhimurium library used covered the complete geno-me . 
Several representatives of the s - dependent promoters E were found more than 10 times and some were found only once . 
Therefore , the number of identiﬁed s - dependent E promoters may not be complete . 
Table 1 . 
Primers used in this study 
Name 
Sequence ( 5 § R3 § ) 
Characteristic 
247 
CGCCAGGGTTTTCCCAGTCACGAC GGGTTCCGCGCACATTTCCCCG 
Reverse primer from lacZa of pSB40 Direct primer from 59 region ﬂanking 
mut80 
the BamHI site of pSB40 
CAGAACATTTAGCGCCGGCAG GCGAAAATGCCTTCATGTGTAC 
YggTRev YraPRev 
Reverse primer from the yggT gene 
Reverse primer from the yraP gene Reverse primer from the ygiM gene 
CTTCAGCATGAGAGACGGCG CAATGCTTCGGCAATACCCG 
YgiMRev TolRRev 
Reverse primer from the tolR gene Reverse primer from the rpoD gene 
GGGCATACTTATATTTTGGC CTATCAATACGGTTGAAACG 
RpoDRev S1251Rev 
Reverse primer from the stm1251 gene Reverse primer from the stm1250 gene 
CCTTTTGGGAGGAAATATGGTCG GTTTCGGCAGAATGTATTGTAGCG 
S1250Rev PsdRev 
Reverse primer from the psd gene Reverse primer from the ycbK gene 
GGGTCGAGAGTGTGGCAAACG CGTGCATAGCAACGGCCATCG 
YcbKRev FkpARev 
Reverse primer from the fkpA gene Reverse primer from the ptr gene 
GCGGTTGCCAACCGATATCC CCCGACGGTATTCGAGGCTGC 
PrtRev SurARev 
Reverse primer from the surA gene Reverse primer from the yabI gene 
CCGTGCCGGGTAAAATCAACC GCCAGAAACAGGCTCAACG 
YabIRev YﬁORev 
Reverse primer from the yﬁO gene Reverse primer from the yiiD gene 
CCAGCGTAAACTGCGACACC CCGTCCAGCAGACCGGGAAGC 
YiiDRev DedDRev 
Reverse primer from the dedD gene Reverse primer from the yfeK gene 
CCTTTTTCTGCGCCAGCGC 
YfeKRev SbmARev 
ACGGCGATCAGCGCCCAAACAAACGCCG 
Reverse primer from the sbmA gene Reverse primer from the rpoH gene 
CGCCGCCCGGATATAAGATTCC GCCAAACCTAAACTCAGAGCCAG 
RpoHRev HtrARev 
Reverse primer from the htrA gene Reverse primer from the lpxP gene 
CCAGTAGCGCGGGTGCAAAAACG CCCAGTGACGTAAATCAAGCG 
LpxPRev YaeTRev 
Reverse primer from the yaeT gene Reverse primer from the oppA gene 
GCTTGTCGGCTAACTGAACG CCGTTTTCACCTTTCACCTGC 
OppARev YggNRev 
Reverse primer from the yggN gene Reverse primer from the yfeY gene 
CCTTGCTCAGTGACTTCTGTCG GGATAGTCACGCAACCGCTC 
YfeYRev YeaYRev 
Reverse primer from the yeaY gene Reverse primer from the yiaD gene 
CGGTGTAAGGGTTTGTTGTGC CCATCCAGTCCATGGTAGCTGC 
YiaDRev FusARev 
Reverse primer from the fusA gene Reverse primer from the eno gene 
GATCACCGACTTATAGGCATCC GAATAGACTTGCTTTTTACC 
EnoRev PlsBRev 
Reverse primer from the plsB gene Reverse primer from the ydcG gene 
YdcGRev 
CTGAATGCTGTTATAGGCCTGC 
( Fig. 1 , lanes 1 ) . 
No RNA-protected fragment was identiﬁed with control RNA from S. Typhimurium SL1344 containing pAC7 , grown to exponential phase and also induced with arabinose ( Fig. 1 , lanes 2 ) . 
The TSPs of the identiﬁed promoters were in the identical positions as for the s - dependent promoter in the E. coli two-E plasmid system located on the corresponding pEST plasmid . 
Thus , these results indicated that the chromosomally located promoters are dependent in vivo on s in S. E Typhimurium . 
By using this strategy , 34 s - dependent E promoters were localized and veriﬁed in vivo in S. Typhimurium . 
Comparison of the nucleotide sequences upstream of the identiﬁed TSPs ( Fig. 2 ) revealed a consensus promoter sequence that is similar to that of s E of E. coli ( Rezuchova et al. , 2003 ) . 
Interestingly , based on the generated sequence logo ( Fig. 2b ) , another residue , a G preceding the 210 region , appeared to be conserved in the s - dependent promoters , thus suggesting a new E s - consensus sequence , GGAACTT-N15-GTCTAA . 
The E generated logo and the conservation of nucleotides within the 235 and 210 regions ( Fig. 2 ) correlates well with our experimental analysis of the importance of speciﬁc bases within the S. Typhimurium s - dependent rpoEp3 E promoter for binding with Es . 
This mutagenesis analysis E identiﬁed the bases shown in upper case letters as the most important in the 235 ( ggAActt ) and 210 ( TctaA ) regions ( Miticka et al. , 2004 ) . 
Interestingly , as in E. coli ( Rezuchova et al. , 2003 ) , in almost all cases ( except surAp ) , strictly conserved spacing between the 210 and 235 recognition sites was found in S. Typhimurium s - dependent promo-E ters ( Fig. 2 ) . 
In several cases , additional s - independent E promoters were identiﬁed , in addition to the corresponding s - dependent promoter , that direct expression of the E corresponding gene of the S. Typhimurium s regulon E ( Fig. 1 ) . 
Characterization of S. Typhimurium promoters recognized by EsE
To locate the TSP of the identiﬁed S. Typhimurium s-E dependent promoters , high-resolution S1-nuclease mapping was performed using RNA isolated from E. coli XL-1 Blue , containing a corresponding pEST plasmid bearing a particular s - dependent promoter and pAC-rpoEST4 , E grown to exponential phase and induced by arabinose . 
The 59-labelled DNA probes were prepared from the corresponding pEST plasmid with external primers , enabling the location of the putative s - dependent promoter only in E the pEST plasmid-bearing DNA fragment . 
In all cases , RNA-protected fragments were identiﬁed only using RNA from E. coli XL-1 Blue with the corresponding pEST plasmid and pAC-rpoEST4 grown under conditions inducing S. Typhimurium rpoE . 
No RNA-protected fragment was identiﬁed with a control RNA from E. coli containing a particular pEST plasmid and pAC7 grown under similar conditions . 
To investigate the activities of these putative s-E dependent promoters in their chromosomal location in S. Typhimurium , and to conﬁrm their dependence upon s , high-resolution S1-nuclease mapping was performed E using the 59-labelled probes prepared from the corres-ponding pEST plasmids using internal reverse primers from the coding regions of the corresponding s - dependent E S. Typhimurium genes and RNA isolated from S. Typhimurium SL1344 containing pAC-rpoEST4 or pAC7 , respectively , grown to exponential phase and induced for 3 h with arabinose . 
RNA-protected fragments were identiﬁed using RNA isolated from S. Typhimurium SL1344 containing pAC-rpoEST4 , and grown to exponential phase with rpoE expression artiﬁcially induced with arabinose 
Identiﬁcation of S. Typhimurium sE-dependent genes
Comparison of the nucleotide sequence downstream of identiﬁed promoters with the complete sequence of S. Typhimurium LT2 ( http://genomeold.wustl.edu/projects/ bacterial/styphimurium / ) and almost completed sequence of S. Typhimurium SL1344 ( www.sanger.ac.uk/Projects/ Salmonella ) revealed the genes directed by the identiﬁed S. E Typhimurium s - dependent promoters ( Table 2 ) . 
The 34 E identiﬁed s - dependent promoters control expression of 62 genes found in both Salmonella genomes , including 18 single genes and 13 proposed operons . 
Possible operon E structures of the s - dependent genes were predicted on the basis of close gene arrangements and transcription direction in the genomic sequence of S. Typhimurium ( in many cases ORFs in operons were translationally coupled ) . 
One operon ( stm1250 , stm1251 ) was controlled by two tandem E E s - dependent promoters . 
Interestingly , 13 s - dependent promoters were located in the coding region of the upstream convergent genes . 
Based on these data , these 62 s - dependent genes probably constitute the s regulon in E E S. Typhimurium . 
E 
Members of the s regulon common in S. Typhimurium and E. coli
Three independent approaches have already identiﬁed 183 s - dependent genes in E. coli ( Dartigalongue et al. , 2001 ; E Kabir et al. , 2005 ; Rezuchova et al. , 2003 ) . 
As in E. coli , the genes regulated by S. Typhimurium s fall into similar E functional categories , including periplasmic proteases and folding factors , proteins involved in cell membrane integrity and in phospholipid and LPS biosynthesis , regulatory proteins , primary metabolism proteins and membrane or periplasmic proteins of unknown function ( Table 2 ) . 
Of the 62 identiﬁed S. Typhimurium s - dependent genes , 39 E orthologues ( rpoE , rseA , rseB , rseC , rpoH , rpoD , fusA , tufA , htrA , recB , surA , pdxA , ksgA , apaG , apaH , fkpA , plsB , psd , yjeP , lpxP , yaeT , hlpA , lpxD , yﬁO , tolA , tolB , pal , ybgF , yabI , ycbK , ycbL , yeaY , yfeY , yiiD , sbmA , yaiW , yraP , ygiM , yggN ) have been shown previously to be s - dependent in E. coli . 
E Recently , two of the identiﬁed members of the s regulon , E YaeT and YﬁO , have been shown to form a multicomponent complex together with YfgL and NlpB proteins which is essential for the assembly of proteins in the outer membrane of E. coli ( Wu et al. , 2005 ) , thus assigning a role of these two previously uncharacterized proteins in outer-membrane biogenesis . 
Three of these s - dependent genes have hitherto been E shown to be involved in Salmonella virulence . 
The surA gene , encoding a periplasmic peptidylprolyl-cis-trans-iso-merase ( PPIase ) involved in protein folding , has a role in adherence and invasion of host eukaryotic cells . 
Furthermore , the S. Typhimurium surA mutant was attenuated when administrated orally or intravenously to BALB/c mice and the S. Typhimurium surA mutant demonstrated potential as a vaccine candidate ( Sydenham et al. , 2000 ) . 
In contrast , the other s - dependent PPIase-encoding E gene , fkpA , has only a minor effect on the ability of S. Typhimurium to invade and survive within epithelial cells and macrophages and cause infection in mice . 
However , the effect of the fkpA mutation on S. Typhimurium virulence was more profound if the mutation was combined with a mutation in surA , or in another member of the s regulon , E htrA ( Humphreys et al. , 2003 ) . 
The htrA ( degP ) gene encodes a periplasmic protease essential for degradation of damaged proteins . 
In E. coli , HtrA is required for survival at high temperatures ( Strauch et al. , 1989 ) ; in contrast , S. typhimurium htrA mutant strains are not temperaturesensitive , but are more sensitive to oxidizing agents and are required for survival within macrophages and for virulence in mice ( Johnson et al. , 1991 ; Humphreys et al. , 1999 ) . 
However , the difference in S. Typhimurium rpoE and htrA mutants in terms of the degree of their attenuation in mice and their sensitivity to noxious agents indicated that additional genes in the s regulon should play a critical E role in virulence and in combating a variety of stresses ( Humphreys et al. , 1999 ) . 
Differentially regulated genes of the sE regulon in S. Typhimurium and E. coli Intriguingly , the s - dependent promoters of several S. E Typhimurium genes were different to their counterparts previously identiﬁed in E. coli . 
The expression of the rpoE , E rseA , rseB , rseC operon is governed by a s - dependent promoter located in an almost identical position to a highly similar sequence ( identical 235 and 210 conserved regions ) in both S. Typhimurium and E. coli ( Miticka et al. , 2003 ) . 
Likewise , S. Typhimurium s - dependent promoters rpoHp , E htrAp , sbmAp , fkpAp , fusAp , psdp , lpxP , yeaYp and yggNp were highly similar ( with almost identical 235 and 210 conserved regions ) and located in almost identical positions to their counterparts in E. coli . 
However , the sequences and E locations of both S. Typhimurium s - dependent rpoDp promoters were different from their counterpart ( rpoDp3 ) in E. coli ( Dartigalongue et al. , 2001 ) . 
We found that the E reported E. coli s - dependent rpoDp3 promoter is located in H a similar position to the previously located s - dependent promoter in the E. coli rpoD gene ( Taylor et al. , 1984 ) . 
H Moreover , we have identiﬁed this s - dependent promoter in an identical position in S. Typhimurium ( Fig. 1 ) . 
A similar discrepancy has been found for the S. Typhimurium E s - dependent promoters yﬁOp , yraPp and ygiMp . 
The E s - dependent promoters of all their E. coli counterparts ( ecfDp , ecfHp and ecfGp ) have been located further downstream ( Dartigalongue et al. , 2001 ) and display only very weak similarity to the s consensus sequence ( Rezuchova E et al. , 2003 ; Miticka et al. , 2004 ) . 
The signals located by Dartigalongue et al. ( 2001 ) may thus correspond to the premature termination of the reverse transcriptase , as they used primer extension analysis for the location of the s - dependent promoters . 
In our case , we veriﬁed s-E E dependent promoters using the more reliable S1-nuclease mapping technique ( Kormanec , 2001 ) . 
Moreover , we found sequences highly similar to S. Typhimurium s - dependent E promoters ( with identical 235 and 210 regions ) in similar positions upstream of E. coli genes , suggesting they may correspond to the s - dependent promoters in this species . 
E However , we can not rule out the possibility that these s-E dependent genes are differentially expressed in the two species . 
This also may be the case for surA and the yaeL ( ecfE ) , yaeT ( ecfK ) , hlpA ( skp ) , lpxD operon . 
In E. coli , expression of surA is proposed to be governed by a s-E dependent promoter ( which does not ﬁt the s consensus E sequence ) 176 bp upstream of the imp ( ostA ) gene that is located upstream of surA ( Dartigalongue et al. , 2001 ) . 
However in S. Typhimurium , the s - dependent surAp promo-E ter has been located at the 39 end of the imp ( ostA ) coding region . 
In the case of the s - dependent yaeL ( ecfE ) , yaeT ( ecfK ) , E hlpA ( skp ) , lpxD operon in E. coli , three proposed s-E dependent promoters were identiﬁed , none of which ﬁt the s consensus sequence ( Dartigalongue et al. , 2001 ) . 
The ﬁrst E proposed s - dependent promoter , ecfEp , was located upE stream of yaeL ( ecfE ) , the second , skpp , was located upstream of the hlpA ( skp ) gene , and the third , lpxDp2 , was located at the end of the hlpA ( skp ) coding region , upstream of the lpxD gene ( Dartigalongue et al. , 2001 ) . 
However , in S. Typhimurium , we have identiﬁed only one s - dependent E promoter in this region , yaeTp , which is located in the yaeL coding region upstream of the yaeT gene . 
We have analysed the whole of the S. Typhimurium yaeL , yaeT , hlpA , lpxD operon region for other potential s - dependent promoters E but we were unable to identify any s - dependent promoters E in the regions corresponding to the proposed E. coli s-E dependent promoters , although there were several s-E independent promoters ( data not shown ) . 
As with the previous cases , we have identiﬁed sequences highly similar to the s - dependent promoter yaeTp ( with almost identical E conserved 235 and 210 regions ) in a similar position in E. coli , indicating that this is likely to be the s - dependent E promoter directing expression of yaeT and downstream genes in E. coli . 
However , as for the previous promoters , we can not rule out that there may be differences in the regulation of s - dependent genes between S. Typhimurium E and E. coli . 
Members of the sE regulon speciﬁc for S. Typhimurium We identiﬁed 23 S. Typhimurium s - dependent genes ( ptr , E recD , tolR , oppA , oppB , oppC , oppD , oppF , stm1741 , eno , yggT , yggU , yggV , yggW , yjfO , yjfN , yiaD , dedD , ydcG , yfeK , yfeL , stm1250 , stm1251 ) that have not been previously identiﬁed to be dependent upon s in E. coli . 
The inferred E functions of some of these new members of s regulon fall E broadly into the same categories as previously described for the s regulon ( Dartigalongue et al. , 2001 ; Kabir et al. , 2005 ; E Rezuchova et al. , 2003 ) . 
Interestingly , in addition to the well characterized periplasmic serine protease HtrA ( DegP ) , another periplasmic protease , Protease III , belongs to the s E regulon in S. Typhimurium . 
Protease III ( Pitrilysis ) , the product of the ptr gene , is a periplasmic metalloprotease with speciﬁcity towards insulin and other low-molecular-mass substrates . 
The physiological role of Protease III is not known ( Dykstra & Kushner , 1985 ; Swamy & Goldberg , 1982 ) . 
It is thought that Protease III is involved in the turnover of proteins in the periplasmic space ( Baneyx & Georgiou , 1991 ; Betton et al. , 1998 ; Cornista et al. , 2004 ) . 
Thus , increased levels of Protease III may be needed after envelope stress . 
Expression of the ptr gene has been partially characterized in E. coli . 
A single promoter , 127 bp upstream from the start codon of ptr , has been identiﬁed in the upstream region ( Claverie-Martin et al. , 1987 ) . 
Interestingly , no signal corresponding to this promoter region was identiﬁed in S. Typhimurium , although another s-E independent promoter was identiﬁed downstream of the s-E dependent ptrp promoter in the recC coding region 582 bp upstream from the start codon of ptr ( data not shown ) . 
This indicates that ptr is differentially expressed in E. coli and S. Typhimurium and that ptr may not belong to the s E regulon in E. coli . 
As in E. coli , the S. Typhimurium ptr gene is intriguingly located between the recC and recBD genes which encode subunits of exonuclease V involved in DNA repair and genetic recombination . 
As the stop and start codons of ptr , recB and recD overlap , it is suggested that these genes may be part of an operon . 
The s - dependent E ptrp promoter may therefore also regulate expression of the downstream recBD genes , indicating a new role for the s regulon in DNA repair and recombination . 
Actually , the E recB gene has been recently found to be dependent upon s in E. coli ( Kabir et al. , 2005 ) . 
Interestingly , mutants of S. E Typhimurium lacking the recBC function are avirulent in mice and unable to grow inside macrophages , and it has been suggested that S. Typhimurium uses this RecBCD recombination pathway to repair DNA double-strand breaks produced during growth inside macrophages ( Buchmeier et al. , 1993 ) . 
Thus , recBC may be additional genes in the s regulon that have a critical role in virulence . 
E 
One of the identiﬁed S. Typhimurium s - dependent pro-E moters has been located in the coding region of the tolQ gene in the ybgC , tolQ , tolR , tolA , tolB , pal , ybgF gene cluster . 
In E. coli , the genes in this cluster appear to be transcribed from two constitutive promoters , one immediately upstream of ybgC and the other upstream of tolB , and producing two transcripts : ybgC , tolQRAB , pal , ybgF and tolB , pal , ybgF ( Vianney et al. , 1996 ) . 
The tolQRAB and pal genes are conserved in most Gram-negative bacteria and encode proteins of the Tol -- Pal system that are implicated in the maintenance of cell envelope integrity and in the transport of newly synthesized components through the periplasm . 
This system has also been found to facilitate the uptake of ﬁlamentous phage DNA and group A colicins . 
No obvious phenotypes have been assigned to ybgC and ybgF , which encode cytoplasmic and periplasmic proteins , respectively ( Lazzaroni et al. , 1999 ; Cascales & Lloubes , 2004 ) . 
Recently , it has been shown that the TolA protein is required for the correct surface expression of the E. coli O7 antigen , thus demonstrating a role of the Tol -- Pal system in LPS biogenesis . 
Interestingly , E. coli tolA and pal mutants , which are associated with defects in the bacterial cell envelope , elicit a speciﬁc s - mediated ESR that in turn reduces wzy-E dependent O antigen polymerization ( Vines et al. , 2005 ) . 
Increased expression of the mainly periplasmic component of the Tol -- Pal system from the internal s - dependent E tolRp promoter may help S. Typhimurium to cope with extracytoplasmic stress by upregulating the production of proteins that are essential for cell envelope integrity . 
Interestingly , except for tolR , all other genes encoding the Tol -- Pal system have been found recently to be dependent upon s in E. coli ( Kabir et al. , 2005 ) . 
This indicates E a different s - dependent regulation of this system in E the two organisms . 
Moreover , an S. Typhimurium tolB mutant exhibits increased sensitivity to antimicrobial peptides and is less virulent than its wild-type parent as a consequence of the loss of outer membrane stability ( Tamayo et al. , 2002 ) . 
Fig. 1 . 
Examples of TSP determination for S. Typhimurium sE-dependent promoters by high-resolution S1-nuclease mapping . 
The particular 59-labelled DNA fragment was hybridized with 40 mg RNA isolated from exponentially grown S. Typhimurium SL1344 containing pAC-rpoEST4 ( lanes 1 ) or pAC7 ( lanes 2 ) and induced for 3 h with 0 ? 
2 % arabinose . 
The RNA-protected DNA fragments were analysed on DNA sequencing gels together with G+A ( lane A ) and T+C ( lane T ) sequencing ladders derived from end-labelled fragments ( Maxam & Gilbert , 1980 ) . 
Thin horizontal arrows indicate the positions of RNA-protected fragments and thick angled arrows indicate the nucleotide corresponding to TSP . 
Before assigning the TSP , 1 ? 
5 nt was subtracted from the length of the protected fragment to account for the difference in the 39 ends resulting from S1-nuclease digestion and the chemical sequencing reactions . 
In some cases , the thick angled arrows indicate sE-independent promoters . 
All S1-nuclease mapping experiments were performed twice with independent sets of RNA with similar results . 
Fig. 2 . 
( a ) Nucleotide sequence alignment of the S. Typhimurium sE-dependent promoters . 
The corresponding '' 10 and '' 35 regions are depicted in bold . 
The TSP is in bold and underlined . 
The S. Typhimurium sE consensus sequence is shown below the alignment . 
( b ) Determination of the S. Typhimurium sE consensus sequence . 
The aligned promoter sequences were analysed using the WebLogo program ( http://weblogo.berkeley.edu/ ) . 
The sequences were trimmed at the 39 end to make them all the same length as required by the program . 
Also , a ` C ' residue in the spacer region of the surAp promoter was removed to make it the same length as the rest of the promoters . 
The height of a stack indicates sequence conservation ( 2 = 100 % conservation ) and the height of each individual nucleotide within the stack indicates its relative frequency at that position . 
Table 2 . 
Function and genetic organization of genes directed by sE in S. Typhimurium SL1344 
IM , Inner membrane ; OM , outer membrane ; HP , hypothetical protein ; asterisks indicate the presence of an internal s - dependent promoter ; E in all cases putative or known promoters lie to the left of the leftmost genes . 
Gene name 
Alternative name 
Proposed operon structure 
Function 
Transcriptional factors and regulatory genes rpoE stm2640 
s / ECF sigma factor ; anti-sigma factor ; negative E regulator ; putative regulator s / s / heat-shock factor 32 H s / principal sigma factor 70 
rpoE rseA rseB rseC 
rpoH rpoD 
stm3568 stm3211 
rpoH 
dnaG * rpoD 
Primary metabolism functions fusA 
stm3446 stm2952 
rpsG * fusA tufA pyrG * eno 
Translation EF-G , EF-Tu Enolase ( glycolysis ) 
eno 
Periplasmic proteases and folding factors 
htrA ptr 
stm0209 stm2995 
htrA Periplasmic serine protease 
recC * ptr recB Periplasmic protease III ; exonuclease V b and 
recD a subunits 
stm3453 stm0092 
fkpA surA 
fkpA Peptidyl-prolyl-cis-trans-isomerase 
imp * surA pdxA Peptidyl-prolyl-cis-trans-isomerase ; pyridoxine ksgA apaG apaH biosynthesis ; dimethyladenosine transferase ; HP 
LPS , phospholipids and OM biogenesis plsB 
plsB 
stm4235 stm4348 
Glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase Phosphatidylserine decarboxylase ; putative 
psd 
yjeQ * psd yjeP 
periplasmic binding protein 
stm2401 , ddg lpxP 
lpxP yaeT 
Cold-shock-induced palmitoeoyl tranferase 
stm0224 , ecfK yaeL * yaeT hlpA 
OM biogenesis ; histone-like OM protein ; lipid A biosynthesis 
lpxD 
stm2663 , ecfD yﬁO 
OM lipoprotein involved in OM biogenesis Tol-Pal membrane system , cell envelope integrity , 
yﬁO tolR 
stm0746 tolQ * tolR tolA tolB pal ybgF 
transport through the periplasm 
oppA 
oppA oppB oppC oppD oppF 
Periplasmic oligopeptide transport proteins of 
stm1746 
ABC family ; putative voltage-gated potassium channel 
stm1741 
Unknown function sbmA 
Putative ABC superfamily transporter ; putative OM lipoprotein 
sbmA yaiW 
stm0376 
stm3203 , ecfG ygiM stm3107 , ecfN yggN 
ygiM yggN 
Putative IM protein , putative SH3 domain protein , Putative periplasmic protein 
stm3101 yggS * yggT yggU yggV yggW 
yggT 
Putative integral membrane resistance protein ; HP ; xanthosine triphosphate pyrophosphatase ; 
oxidase 
folC * dedD yabI 
stm2364 stm0105 
dedD yabI 
Putative membrane protein 
Putative DedA family membrane protein Putative OM protein ; putative 
ycbK ycbL 
stm0996 
ycbK 
metallo-b-lactamase Putative OM lipoprotein 
stm3267 , ecfH yraO * yraP stm1819 , slp yeaY 
yraP yeaY 
Putative OM lipoprotein Putative OM lipoprotein 
stm2447 yfeY stm3645 yiaD 
yfeY yiaD 
Putative OM lipoprotein 
stm4379 yjfO ujfN stm2438 yfeK yfeL 
yjfO yfeK 
Putative OM lipoprotein ; putative IM protein 
Putative periplasmic protein ; penicillin-binding protein , putative membrane carboxypeptidase 
stm4029 stm1622 
yihZ * yiiD ydcG 
yiiD ydcG 
Putative acetyltransferase 
Putative periplasmic glucan biosynthesis protein 
HP ; putative molecular chaperone 
stm1250 * 
stm1250 
stm1251 ( agsA ) 
A s - dependent promoter has been located upstream of E the S. Typhimurium oppA gene . 
The oppABCDF operon encodes proteins of the major oligopeptide permease ( Opp ) that belongs to the ABC transporter superfamily . 
Opp is the major peptide transport system of enteric bacteria , essential for the uptake of oligopeptides from growth medium and for the uptake and recycling of cell-wall peptides for synthesis of peptidoglycan . 
In addition to nutrient acquisition , peptide transporters have been shown to play an important role in a diverse array of other functions , including chemotaxis , quorum sensing and conjugation ( Detmers et al. , 2001 ; Higgins , 1992 ) . 
Interestingly , OppA of E. coli also has a chaperone-like function , indicating that OppA , together with some other periplasmic substratebinding proteins , might be involved in protein folding and protection from stress in the periplasm ( Richarme & Caldas , 1997 ) . 
Thus Opp seems to fall into the functional categories of the s regulon and its increased production may be E needed under conditions of envelope stress . 
Expression of the opp operon has been suggested to be constitutive in S. Typhimurium , but the OppA protein intriguingly accumulates in the periplasm as cells reach stationary phase ( Hiles et al. , 1987 ) . 
Analysis of the genomic sequence of S. Typhimurium has revealed that , in contrast to E. coli , the S. Typhimurium opp operon is followed by a potentially cotranscribed gene , stm1741 , which encodes a putative membrane transport protein similar to voltage-gated ion channels . 
In E. coli two promoters , P2 and P3 , directing expression of the opp operon have been identiﬁed and localized , and there is an additional promoter , P1 , which originates in the IS2 sequence present in some E. coli strains ( Igarashi et al. , 1997 ) . 
In addition to the s - dependent oppAp promoter E ( Fig. 1 ) , we have identiﬁed a s - independent promoter in E S. Typhimurium which has an identical TSP to the E. coli P3 promoter ( Fig. 1 ) . 
Comparison of the E. coli and S. Typhimurium oppA promoter regions revealed similarity from the ATG codon up to the P3 promoter and in the sequence upstream of the E. coli P2 promoter . 
However , there was no similarity around the S. Typhimurium s - dependent oppAp promoter , indicating that the E. coli E oppA operon is probably not s - regulated . 
E 
The eno gene encodes the glycolytic enzyme enolase which implicates the s regulon in primary metabolism . 
Inter-E estingly , enolase has been shown to be a functional part of the membrane-associated RNA degradosome complex essential for mRNA turnover ( Bernstein et al. , 2004 ; Carpousis , E 2002 ) . 
Therefore , another proposed role for the s regulon is in speciﬁc mRNA turnover during particular conditions of metabolic stress . 
Of the remaining S. Typhimurium s - dependent genes , E 11 ( yggT , yggU , yggV , yggW , yjfO , yjfN , yiaD , dedD , ydcG , yfeK , yfeL ) have homologues in E. coli and two ( stm1250 and stm1251 ) are speciﬁc to S. Typhimurium . 
An S. Typhimurium s - dependent promoter has been localized E in the coding region of the yggSTUVW operon ( Table 2 ) . 
The proposed s - dependent yggTUVW genes encode E mainly proteins with unknown function ( integral membrane protein , putative cytoplasmic protein , putative xanthosine triphosphate pyrophosphatase and putative oxidase ) . 
However , in E. coli , the yggV ( rdgB ) gene has been shown to have a role in DNA repair during DNA replication , most probably due to its xanthosine tripho-sphate pyrophosphatase activity which helps in avoiding chromosome fragmentation ( Bradshaw & Kuzminov , 2003 ) . 
Thus , this is likely to be a further gene of the s E regulon in S. Typhimurium , in addition to recB and recD , with a role in DNA repair and recombination . 
Seven S. Typhimurium s - dependent genes encode puta-E tive outer-membrane lipoproteins that contain a signal sequence typical of bacterial lipoproteins followed by a characteristic lipobox containing a Cys residue which could serve as the lipid attachment site . 
These include four homologues , YﬁO , YraP , YeaY and YfeY , to the recently characterized six s - dependent lipoproteins from E. coli E ( Onufryk et al. , 2005 ) and three other putative outermembrane lipoproteins YaiW , YjfO and YiaD ( Table 2 ) . 
For the yjfN , dedD and yfeK genes no function could be predicted , although they all encode putative membrane or periplasmic proteins ( Table 2 ) , thus indicating a possible function in the cell envelope . 
The yfeK gene is translationally coupled to the yfeL gene encoding a putative membrane carboxypeptidase ( penicillin-binding protein ) , probably involved in cell envelope biogenesis . 
The ydcG gene encodes a putative periplasmic glucan biosynthesis protein . 
It is an orthologue of the recently characterized ydcG gene ( renamed mdoD ) encoding the periplasmic OpgD protein involved in the control of the structural glucose backbone of osmoregulated periplasmic glucans ( OPG ) in E. coli . 
Expression of the ydcG/mdoD gene increases during stationary phase ( Lequette et al. , 2004 ) . 
Interestingly , mutants defective in OPG synthesis were shown to be highly attenuated or avirulent in several pathogenic bacteria , including S. Typhimurium . 
The OPG seem to be an important component of the cell envelope under extreme environmental conditions and especially during interactions between pathogenic bacteria with their eukaryotic host ( Bohin , 2000 ) . 
Moreover , OPG have been shown to be essential for resistance to SDS and other anionic detergents ( Rajagopal et al. , 2003 ) . 
Hence , all these phenotypes clearly fall into the typical characteristics of the S. Typhimurium s E regulon . 
In the case of the stm1250 and stm1251 genes , two S. Typhimurium s - dependent promoters , stm1250p and E stm1251p , were localized in close proximity , with TSPs just 394 bp apart . 
The stm1250p promoter is located upstream of stm1250 which encodes a putative cytoplasmic protein , and the stm1251p promoter is located in the stm1250 coding region , directing expression of the downstream stm1251 gene which encodes a putative molecular chaperone or small heat-shock protein . 
Both proteins appear to be speciﬁc for Salmonella species . 
However , signiﬁcant similarity ( 31 -- 42 % aa identity ) to STM1251 has been found with several putative molecular chaperones or small heat-shock proteins of the Hsp20 family from Gramnegative bacteria , including the E. coli and S. Typhimurium small heat-shock proteins IbpA and IbpB ( 32 and 31 % identity , respectively ) . 
Based on the S1-nuclease mapping analysis , it is clear that both genes , though separated by a 151 bp intergenic region , form an operon and , interestingly , a further heat-shock-inducible promoter having the s H consensus sequence has been localized in this intergenic region , directing expression of stm1251 ( data not shown ) . 
The product of the stm1251 gene has been partially characterized recently in S. Typhimurium . 
This gene encodes a novel small heat-shock protein named AgsA ( the gene has been renamed agsA ) . 
Together with the two other small heat-shock proteins , IbpA and IbpB , AgsA has been proved to be an effective chaperone preventing aggregation of non-native cytoplasmic proteins and maintaining them in a state competent for refolding in S. Typhimurium at high temperatures ( Tomoyasu et al. , 2003 ) . 
Hence , its s-E dependence indicates a partial overlap of the cytoplasmic stress response ( s - dependent ) and ESR ( s - dependent ) in H E S. Typhimurium . 
This overlap has also been described recently in S. Typhimurium , where activation of s has been E shown to enhance expression of the s regulon via s and S H Hfq during stationary phase , indicating that interactions E H S between alternative sigma factors s , s and s permit the integration of various stress signals to produce coordinated responses ( Bang et al. , 2005 ) . 
This study , which was published during the writing of this manuscript , also provided supplementary material detailing S. Typhimurium DNA microarray data on the expression proﬁle of s-E dependent genes , based on the different stationary-phase mRNA levels in wild-type and rpoE mutant strains . 
Com-E parison of our s - dependent genes with this transcriptional proﬁling data revealed that , although 19 genes were at least twofold down-regulated in the rpoE mutant , many S. Typhimurium s - dependent genes that we have iden-E tiﬁed were unaffected in the rpoE mutant , including such clear s - dependent genes like rpoH , fkpA , htrA , surA , E yraP and others . 
This discrepancy may result from the use of overnight cultures for isolation of RNA from stationary-phase cultures for the DNA microarray experiment . 
Although s is clearly induced in stationary phase E ( Miticka et al. , 2003 ; Testerman et al. , 2002 ) , in our detailed E transcriptional experiment of S. Typhimurium s activation E during growth in LB medium , we found that s activity peaked at 7 h and then gradually decreased to a rather low level after 14 h ( J. Kormanec , unpublished results ) . 
Thus , a lower induction ratio of s - dependent genes between wild-E type and rpoE mutant strains will be seen in long-term stationary-phase cultures , and differences in expression might not be detected . 
E 
In conclusion , in S. Typhimurium , we identiﬁed 34 sdependent promoters that can potentially direct the expre-ssion of 62 genes ; among them , 39 orthologues have been E previously shown to be s - dependent in E. coli . 
The E identiﬁed S. Typhimurium s - dependent genes fall into similar functional categories , involved mainly in cell-envelope homeostasis , as previously suggested for the E. E coli s regulon . 
However , several new functions have emerged , including a role in DNA repair and recombination , and outer-membrane protein assembly . 
Recent data on alternative degS-independent induction of s during carbon E starvation in S. Typhimurium have suggested that members E of the s regulon , in addition to their function in the repair or elimination of damaged cell-envelope proteins , also have additional functions necessary for the adaptation of cells to new environmental conditions ( Kenyon et al. , 2005 ) . 
E Interestingly , several s - dependent genes have been shown to have a critical role in the virulence in S. Typhimurium , thus helping to explain the severe attenuation of S. Typhimurium rpoE mutants . 
Further work will be needed to characterize the detail of the biochemical function of E these s - dependent genes and their role in the envelope stress response and virulence in S. Typhimurium . 
These experiments are in progress . 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to M. K. Winson for plasmid pSB40 . 
This work was supported by the Science and Technology Assistance Agency under contract No . 
APVT-51-012004 , a VEGA grant , 2/6010/26 , from the Slovak Academy of Sciences , a Wellcome Trust grant , 065027/Z/01 / Z , and Wellcome Trust studentships 062631/Z/OO / A and 069099/Z/02 / A. 
REFERENCES 
Alba , B. M. & Gross , C. A. ( 2004 ) . 
Regulation of the Escherichia coli s - dependent envelope stress response . 
Mol Microbiol 52 , 613 -- 619 . 
E 
Ausubel , F. M. , Brent , R. , Kingston , R. E. , Moore , D. O. , Seidman , J. S. , Smith , J. A. & Struhl , K. ( 1995 ) . 
Current Protocols in Molecular Biology . 
New York : Wiley . 
Baneyx , F. & Georgiou , G. ( 1991 ) . 
Construction and characterization of Escherichia coli strains deﬁcient in multiple secreted proteases : protease III degrades high-molecular-weight substrates in vivo . 
J Bacteriol 173 , 2696 -- 2703 . 
Bang , I.-S. , Frye , J. G. , McClelland , M. , Velayudhan , J. & Fang , F. C. 
( 2005 ) . 
Alternative sigma factor interactions in Salmonella : s and E s promote antioxidant defences by enhancing s levels . 
Mol H S Microbiol 56 , 811 -- 823 . 
Bernstein , J. A. , Lin , P.-H. , Cohen , S. N. & Lin-Chao , S. ( 2004 ) . 
Global analysis of Escherichia coli RNA degradosome function using DNA array . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 , 2758 -- 2763 . 
Betton , J.-M. , Sassoon , N. , Hofnung , M. & Laurent , M. ( 1998 ) . 
Degradation versus aggregation of misfolded maltose-binding protein in the periplasm of Escherichia coli . 
J Biol Chem 273 , 8897 -- 8902 . 
Bohin , J.-P . 
( 2000 ) . 
Osmoregulated periplasmic glucans in Proteo-bacteria . 
FEMS Microbiol Lett 186 , 11 -- 19 . 
Bradshaw , J. S. & Kuzminov , A. ( 2003 ) . 
RdgB acts to avoid chromosome fragmentation in Escherichia coli . 
Mol Microbiol 48 , 1711 -- 1725 . 
Buchmeier , N. A. , Lipps , C. J. , So , M. Y. & Heffron , F. ( 1993 ) . 
Recombination-deﬁcient mutants of Salmonella typhimurium are avirulent and sensitive to the oxidative burst of macrophages . 
Mol Microbiol 7 , 933 -- 936 . 
Carpousis , A. J. ( 2002 ) . 
The Escherichia coli RNA degradosome : structure , function and relationship to other ribonucleolytic multi-enzyme complexes . 
Biochem Soc Trans 30 , 150 -- 155 . 
Cascales , E. & Lloubes , R. ( 2004 ) . 
Deletion analysis of the peptidoglycan-associated lipoprotein Pal reveals three independent binding sequences including a TolA box . 
Mol Microbiol 51 , 873 -- 885 . 
Claverie-Martin , F. , Diaz-Torres , M. R. & Kuschner , S. R. ( 1987 ) . 
Analysis of the regulatory region of the proteases III ( ptr ) gene of Escherichia coli K-12 . 
Gene 54 , 185 -- 195 . 
Cornista , J. , Ikeuchi , S. , Haruki , M. , Kohara , A. , Takano , K. , Morikawa , M. & Kanaya , S. ( 2004 ) . 
Cleavage of various peptides with pitrilysin from Escherichia coli : kinetic analyses using b-endorphin and its derivatives . 
Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 68 , 2128 -- 2137 . 
Crouch , M.-L. , Becker , L. A. , Bang , I.-S. , Tanabe , H. , Ouellette , A. J. 
& Fang , F. C. ( 2005 ) . 
The alternative sigma factor s is required E for resistance of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium to anti-microbial peptides . 
Mol Microbiol 56 , 789 -- 799 . 
Dartigalongue , C. , Missiakas , D. & Raina , S. ( 2001 ) . 
Characterization of the Escherichia coli s regulon . 
J Biol Chem 276 , 20866 -- 20875 . 
E 
Detmers , F. J. M. , Lanfermeijer , F. C. & Poolman , B. ( 2001 ) . 
Peptides and ATP binding cassette peptide transporters . 
Res Microbiol 152 , 245 -- 258 . 
Dykstra , C. C. & Kushner , S. R. ( 1985 ) . 
Physical characterization of the cloned protease III gene from Escherichia coli . 
J Bacteriol 163 , 1055 -- 1059 . 
Eriksson , S. , Lucchini , S. , Thompson , A. , Rhen , M. & Hinton , J. C. D. ( 2003 ) . 
Unravelling the biology of macrophage infection by gene expression proﬁling of intracellular Salmonella enterica . 
Mol Microbiol 47 , 103 -- 118 . 
Higgins , C. F. ( 1992 ) . 
ABC transporters from microorganisms to man . 
Annu Rev Cell Biol 8 , 67 -- 113 . 
Hiles , I. D. , Gallagher , M. P. , Jamieson , D. J. & Higgins , C. F. 
( 1987 ) . 
Molecular characterization of the oligopeptide permease of Salmonella typhimurium . 
J Mol Biol 195 , 125 -- 142 . 
Hoiseth , S. K. & Stocker , B. A. D. ( 1981 ) . 
Aromatic-dependent Salmonella typhimurium are non-virulent and effective as live vaccines . 
Nature 291 , 238 -- 239 . 
Humphreys , S. , Stevenson , A. , Bacon , A. , Weihardt , A. B. & Roberts , M. ( 1999 ) . 
The alternative sigma factor , s , is critically important for E the virulence of Salmonella typhimurium . 
Infect Immun 67 , 1560 -- 1568 . 
Humphreys , S. , Rowley , G. , Stevenson , A. , Kenyon , W. J. , Spector , M. P. & Roberts , M. ( 2003 ) . 
Role of periplasmic peptidylprolyl 
isomerase in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium virulence . 
Infect Immun 71 , 5386 -- 5388 . 
Igarashi , K. , Saisho , T. , Yuguchi , M. & Kashiwagi , K. ( 1997 ) . 
Molecular mechanism of polyamine stimulation of the synthesis of oligopeptide-binding protein . 
J Biol Chem 272 , 4058 -- 4064 . 
Johnson , K. , Charles , I. , Dougan , G. , Pickard , D. , Ogaora , P. , Costa , G. , Ali , T. , Miller , I. & Hormaeche , C. ( 1991 ) . 
The role of a stress-response protein in Salmonella typhimurium virulence . 
Mol Microbiol 5 , 401 -- 407 . 
Kabir , M. S. , Yamashita , D. , Koyama , S. & 8 other authors ( 2005 ) . 
E 
Cell lysis directed by s in early stationary phase and effect of induction of the rpoE gene on global gene expression in Escherichia coli . 
Microbiology 151 , 2721 -- 2735 . 
Kenyon , W. J. , Sayers , D. G. , Humphreys , S. , Roberts , M. & Spector , 
M. P. ( 2002 ) . 
The starvation-stress response of Salmonella enterica E serovar Typhimurium requires s - , but not CpxR-regulated extracytoplasmic functions . 
Microbiology 148 , 113 -- 122 . 
Kenyon , W. J. , Thomas , S. M. , Johnson , E. , Pallen , M. J. & Spector , 
M. P. ( 2005 ) . 
Shifts from glucose to certain secondary carbon-sources E result in activation of the extracytoplasmic function sigma factor s in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium . 
Microbiology 151 , 2373 -- 2383 . 
Kormanec , J. ( 2001 ) . 
Analyzing the developmental expression of sigma factors with S1-nuclease mapping . 
Methods Mol Biol 160 , 481 -- 494 . 
Lazzaroni , J. C. , Germon , P. , Ray , M.-C . 
& Vianney , A. ( 1999 ) . 
The Tol proteins of Escherichia coli and their involvement in the uptake of biomolecules and outer membrane stability . 
FEMS Microbiol Lett 177 , 191 -- 197 . 
Lequette , Y. , Odberg-Ferragut , C. , Bohin , J.-P . 
& Lacroix , J.-M . 
( 2004 ) . 
Identiﬁcation of mdoD , an mdoG paralog which encodes a twin-arginine-dependent periplasmic protein that controls osmor-egulated periplasmic glucan backbone structures . 
J Bacteriol 186 , 3695 -- 3702 . 
Maxam , A. M. & Gilbert , W. ( 1980 ) . 
Sequencing end-labelled DNA with base speciﬁc chemical cleavages . 
Methods Enzymol 65 , 499 -- 560 . 
Miticka , H. , Rowley , G. , Rezuchova , B. , Homerova , D. , Humphreys , S. , 
Farn , J. , Roberts , M. & Kormanec , J. ( 2003 ) . 
Transcriptional analysis of the rpoE gene encoding extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor s in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium . 
FEMS Microbiol E Lett 226 , 307 -- 314 . 
Miticka , H. , Rezuchova , B. , Homerova , D. , Roberts , M. & Kormanec , J. ( 2004 ) . 
Identiﬁcation of nucleotides critical for activity of the s-E dependent rpoEp3 promoter in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi-murium . 
FEMS Microbiol Lett 238 , 227 -- 233 . 
Onufryk , C. , Crouch , M.-L. , Fang , F. C. & Gross , C. A. ( 2005 ) . 
Characterization of six lipoproteins in the s regulon . 
J Bacteriol 187 , E 4552 -- 4561 . 
Park , S. F. , Stirling , D. A. , Hulton , C. S. J. , Booth , I. R. , Higgins , C. F. & Stewart , G. S. A. B. ( 1989 ) . 
A novel , non-invasive promoter probe vector : cloning of the osmoregulated proU promoter of Escherichia coli K12 . 
Mol Microbiol 3 , 1011 -- 1023 . 
Rajagopal , S. , Eis , N. , Bhattacharya , M. & Nickerson , K. W. 
( 2003 ) . 
Membrane-derived oligosaccharides ( MDOs ) are essential for sodium dodecyl sulphate resistance in Escherichia coli . 
FEMS Microbiol Lett 223 , 25 -- 31 . 
Rezuchova , B. & Kormanec , J. ( 2001 ) . 
A two-plasmid system for identiﬁcation of promoters recognized by RNA polymerase containing extracytoplasmic stress response s in Escherichia coli . 
J Microbiol E Methods 45 , 103 -- 111 . 
Rezuchova , B. , Miticka , H. , Homerova , D. , Roberts , M. & Kormanec , J. 
( 2003 ) . 
New members of the Escherichia coli s regulon identiﬁed by E a two-plasmid system . 
FEMS Microbiol Lett 225 , 1 -- 7 . 
Richarme , G. & Caldas , T. D. ( 1997 ) . 
Chaperone properties of the bacterial periplasmic substrate-binding proteins . 
J Biol Chem 272 , 15607 -- 15612 . 
Rollenhagen , C. , Sorensen , M. , Rizos , K. , Hurvitz , R. & Bumann , D. ( 2004 ) . 
Antigen selection based on expression levels during infection facilitates vaccine development for an intracellular pathogen . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 , 8739 -- 8744 . 
Ruiz , N. & Silhavy , T. J. ( 2005 ) . 
Sensing external stress : watchdogs of the Escherichia coli cell envelope . 
Curr Opin Microbiol 8 , 122 -- 126 . 
Sanger , F. , Nicklen , S. & Coulsen , A. R. ( 1977 ) . 
DNA sequencing with chain-termination inhibitors . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 74 , 5463 -- 5467 . 
Strauch , K. L. , Johnson , K. & Beckwith , J. ( 1989 ) . 
Characterization of degP , a gene required for proteolysis in the cell-envelope and essential for growth of Escherichia coli at high temperatures . 
J Bacteriol 171 , 2689 -- 2696 . 
Swamy , K. H. S. & Goldberg , A. L. ( 1982 ) . 
Subcellular distribution of various proteases in Escherichia coli . 
J Bacteriol 149 , 1027 -- 1033 . 
Sydenham , M. , Douce , G. , Bowe , F. , Ahmed , S. , Chatﬁeld , S. & 
Dougan , G. ( 2000 ) . 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium surA mutants are attenuated and effective live oral vaccines . 
Infect Immun 68 , 1109 -- 1115 . 
Tamayo , R. , Ryan , S. S. , McCoy , A. J. & Gunn , J. S. ( 2002 ) . 
Identiﬁcation and genetic characterization of PmrA-regulated genes and genes involved in polymyxin B resistance in Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium . 
Infect Immun 70 , 6770 -- 6778 . 
Taylor , W. E. , Straus , D. B. , Grossman , A. D. , Burton , Z. F. , Gross , 
C. A. & Burgess , R. R. ( 1984 ) . 
Transcription from a heat-inducible promoter causes heat shock regulation of the sigma subunit of E. coli RNA polymerase . 
Cell 38 , 371 -- 381 . 
Testerman , T. L. , Vazquez-Torres , A. , Xu , Y. , Jones-Carson , J. , E 
Libby , S. J. & Fang , F. C. ( 2002 ) . 
The alternative sigma factor s controls antioxidant defences required for Salmonella virulence and stationary-phase survival . 
Mol Microbiol 43 , 771 -- 782 . 
Tomoyasu , T. , Takaya , A. , Sasaki , T. , Nagase , T. , Kikuno , R. , 
Morioka , M. & Yamamoto , T. ( 2003 ) . 
A new heat shock gene , agsA , which encodes a small chaperone involved in suppressing protein aggregation in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium . 
J Bacteriol 185 , 6331 -- 6339 . 
Vianney , A. , Muller , M. , Clavel , T. , Lazzaroni , J. C. , Portalier , R. & 
Webster , R. E. ( 1996 ) . 
Characterization of the tol-pal region of Escherichia coli K-12 : translational control of tolR expression by TolQ and identiﬁcation of a new open reading frame downstream of pal encoding a periplasmic protein . 
J Bacteriol 178 , 4031 -- 4038 . 
Vines , E. D. , Marolda , C. L. , Balachndran , A. & Valvano , M. A. ( 2005 ) . 
Defective O-antigen polymerization in tolA and pal mutants of Escherichia coli in response to extracytoplasmic stress . 
J Bacteriol 187 , 3359 -- 3368 . 
Wu , T. , Malinverni , J. , Ruiz , N. , Kim , S. , Silhavy , T. J. & 
Kahne , D. ( 2005 ) . 
Identiﬁcation of a multicomponent complex required for outer membrane biogenesis in Escherichia coli . 
Cell 121 , 235 -- 245 .