spase-1 and interleukin 1b in salmonella-infected
Gram-negative bacteria that replicate in the cytosol of mammalian macrophages can activate a signaling pathway leading to caspase-1 cleavage and secretion of interleukin 1b , a powerful host response factor . 
Ipaf , a cytosolic pattern-recognition receptor in the family of nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain -- leucine-rich repeat proteins , is critical in such a response to salmonella infection , but the mechanism of how Ipaf is activated by the bacterium remains poorly understood . 
Here we demonstrate that salmonella strains either lacking ﬂagellin or expressing mutant ﬂagellin were deﬁcient in activation of caspase-1 and in interleukin 1b secretion , although transcription factor NF-jB -- dependent production of interleukin 6 or the chemokine MCP-1 was unimpaired . 
Delivery of ﬂagellin to the macrophage cytosol induced Ipaf-dependent activation of caspase-1 that was independent of Toll-like receptor 5 , required for recognition of extracellular ﬂagellin . 
In macrophages made tolerant by previous exposure to lipopolysaccharide , which abrogates activation of NF-jB and mitogen-activated protein kinases , salmonella infection still activated caspase-1 . 
Thus , detection of ﬂagellin through Ipaf induces caspase-1 activation independently of Toll-like receptor 5 in salmonella-infected and lipopolysaccharide-tolerized macrophages . 
Interleukin 1b ( IL-1b ) and IL-18 are proinﬂammatory cytokines important in the host defense against infection and in the pathogenesis of various inﬂammatory disorders1 . 
Both IL-1b and IL-18 are synthesized as inactive cytoplasmic precursors that are proteolytically processed to biologically active mature forms in response to various proinﬂammatory stimuli by caspase-1 , a cysteine protease2 . 
Another cytokine , IL-33 , has also been described as being processed by caspase-1 ( ref . 
3 ) . 
Caspase-1 is synthesized as an inactive zymogen ( ` procaspase ' ) that becomes activated by cleavage at aspartic residues to generate an enzymatically active heterodimer composed of a 10-kilodalton chain and a 20-kilodalton chain4 . 
Although the intracellular signaling pathways leading to caspase-1 activation remain poorly deﬁned , studies have suggested involvement of members of the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain ( Nod ) -- leucine-rich repeat ( LRR ) family of proteins ( also called NLRs or CATERPILLER ) in the regulation of caspase-1 activation5 -- 7 . 
The Nod-LRR protein family contains more than 20 members , including Nod1 , Nod2 , cryopyrin ( also called Nalp3 ) Nalp1 and Ipaf . 
Nod-LRR proteins contain an N-terminal effector domain , a centrally located Nod and C-terminal LRRs5 . 
The N-terminal regions of cryopyrin and Nalp1 comprise a pyrin domain , whereas Nod1 , Nod2 and Ipaf contain a caspase-recruitment domain5 -- 7 . 
The pyrin and caspase-recruitment domains of cryopyrin and Ipaf associate with those of ASC , an adaptor molecule that interacts with the caspase-recruitment domain of pro-caspase-1 ( refs . 
4,8 ) . 
Cryopyrin and Nalp1 can form an endogenous multiprotein complex containing ASC and caspase-1 , called the ` inﬂammasome ' , that promotes caspase-1 activation and processing of pro-IL-1b4 ,9 . 
Important functions for the adaptor ASC and Ipaf in the innate immune response against pathogenic bacteria have been demonstrated10 -- 12 . 
ASC is critical for caspase-1 activation and secretion of IL-1b and IL-18 in res-ponse to several puriﬁed microbial components as well as intracellular bacteria10 -- 16 . 
In contrast , the function of Ipaf in innate immune responses seems to be more restricted . 
Ipaf is important for the control of caspase-1 activation in response to salmonella infection but is dispensable for responses induced by the intracellular pathogen francisella tularensis and several Toll-like receptor ( TLR ) agonists , including lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) , bacterial lipopeptide and peptidoglycan10 -- 12 . 
In addition , Ipaf has been reported to be important for the early induction of cell death in salmonella-infected macrophages10 , which is consistent with a similar function described for caspase-1 ( ref . 
17 ) . 
At present , it is unclear whether the activation of caspase-1 induced through Ipaf in response to salmonella is ` downstream ' of TLRs or proceeds independently of TLR signaling . 
Furthermore , the speciﬁc salmonella components that mediate Ipaf-dependent caspase-1 activation and production of IL-1b remain unknown . 
We demonstrate here that caspase-1 activation induced in response to intracellular bacteria was triggered by cytosolic exposure to bacterial components and was independent of TLR signaling . 
In salmonella-infected macrophages , caspase-1 activation was induced by the detection of ﬂagellin through Ipaf . 
In macrophages made tolerant to TLR stimulation by exposure to LPS , salmonella infection triggered caspase-1 activation and IL-1b secretion in the absence of activation of transcription factor NF-kB and mitogen-activated protein kinase . 
These data demonstrate that ﬂagellin is the ligand for Ipaf and provide new insights into the activation of the innate immune response . 
MCP-1 ( ng/ml ) IL-1β ( pg/ml ) 
RESULTS Cytosolic bacterial components sufﬁcient for IL-1b secretion
Salmonella encodes a type III secretion system that translocates effector virulence proteins into the host cytosol . 
SipB is a translocase that mediates the transfer of many effector proteins with diverse activity into host cells by the type III secretion system and has been linked to the production of IL-1b18 . 
Consistent with published results10 , the ability of a SipB mutant strain to induce IL-1b secretion was almost abolished , in contrast to that of wild-type salmonella ( Fig. 1a ) . 
Similarly , although wild-type listeria induced IL-1b secretion from macrophages ( Fig. 1b ) , a mutant strain deﬁcient in listeriolysin O ( LLO ) , a factor required for bacterial invasion of the host cytosol from the vacuole , did not19 ( Fig. 1b ) . 
As cytosolic invasion of intracellular bacteria was required for induction of IL-1b , we tested whether cytosolic invasion was sufﬁcient by using a normally extracellular , nonpathogenic Escherichia coli strain able to ` escape ' the phagosome because it was made to express the listeria LLO protein20 ,21 . 
We found that like intracellular salmonella and listeria , the E. coli LLO strain induced IL-1b secretion from infected macrophages ( Fig. 1c ) . 
These results indicate that cytosolic invasion of bacteria is necessary and sufﬁcient for the induction of IL-1b secretion from infected macrophages . 
IL-6 ( pg/ml ) IL-1β ( pg/ml ) 
Flagellin is required for IL-1b production and secretion
Monomeric ﬂagellin is the main constituent of the multimeric ﬂagellum , the organelle responsible for bacterial motility . 
As ﬂagellin is the most abundant protein released by salmonella22 , we investigated whether expression of ﬂagellin is involved in the activation of caspase-1 in macrophages . 
First we tested a salmonella mutant that did not encode any of the ﬂagellar apparatus proteins because of deﬁcient expression of ﬂhCD , the ` master regulatory operon ' that controls the transcription of ﬂagellar genes23 . 
To ensure equal internalization of wild-type and ﬂagellar mutant strains , we included in the infection procedure mild centrifugation to enhance contact between macrophages and mutant bacteria . 
In those conditions , the number of wild-type and mutant salmonella that infected the macrophages was similar at 2 h after infection ( Supplementary Fig. 1 online ) . 
In the absence of the ﬂagellar apparatus , infection of macrophages with salmonella at various macrophage/bacteria ratios did not induce substantial secretion of IL-1b ( Fig. 2a ) . 
Salmonella has two genes , ﬂiC and ﬂjB , that encode monomeric ﬂagellin proteins , the main components of the ﬂagellar ﬁlament24 . 
Infection of macrophages with a salmonella mutant lacking both ﬂiC and ﬂjB showed that this mutant ( ﬂiC-ﬂjB ) was defective in eliciting IL-1b production ( Fig. 2b ) . 
In contrast , infection with the ﬂiC-ﬂjB mutant produced induction of the chemokine MCP-1 and IL-6 comparable to that obtained with wild-type salmonella ( Fig. 2c , d ) . 
These results indicate that expression of ﬂagellin is required for the induction of secretion of IL-1b from salmonella-infected macrophages . 
Activation of caspase-1 requires ﬂagellin and Ipaf
Secretion of mature IL-1b in response to salmonella infection is controlled by several events , including activation of caspase-1 ( ref . 
17 ) . 
To assess the function of ﬂagellin in caspase-1 activation induced by salmonella , we prepared extracts from macrophages infected with wild-type and ﬂagellin mutant strains at various times after infection and analyzed them by immunoblot with an antibody that recognizes the p20 subunit of caspase-1 . 
In agreement with recognizing total and activated forms of the NF-kB inhibitor IkBa and the mitogen-activated kinases Erk and p38 . 
That analysis demonstrated that pre-exposure of macrophages to LPS abolished the activation of NF-kB , Erk and p38 induced by salmonella infection in both wild-type and Ipaf-deﬁcient macrophages ( Fig. 6a ) , indicating that suppression of the NF-kB , Erk and p38 signaling pathways is independent of Ipaf . 
Even though NF-kB , Erk and p38 pathways were not active in the tolerant wild-type macrophages , intracellular activation of pro-caspase-1 induced by salmonella was unimpaired , as determined by detection of the mature 20-kilodalton subunit of caspase-1 ( Fig. 6b ) . 
However , as anticipated , the proteolytic processing of pro-caspase-1 induced by salmonella was abolished in Ipaf-deﬁcient macrophages pretreated with LPS ( Fig. 6b ) . 
Thus , Ipaf-dependent caspase-1 processing occurs independently of activation of NF-kB and mitogen-activated protein kinase in response to salmonella infection . 
IL-1b secretion requires ﬂagellin and Ipaf but not TLR
To further study the function of ﬂagellin in the immune response to salmonella infection , we challenged tolerant macrophages with pur-iﬁed bacterial components or heat-inactivated bacteria or infected the cells with live bacteria and measured the secretion of proinﬂammatory cytokines . 
Consistent with our biochemical analysis ( Fig. 6 ) , macro-phages prestimulated for 24 h with LPS did not produce tumor necrosis factor when challenged with LPS , synthetic basic lipopeptide ( a TLR2 agonist ) or heat-inactivated salmonella ( Fig. 7a ) . 
Moreover , the production of tumor necrosis factor was much lower in tolerant macrophages stimulated with live salmonella than in naive macrophages ( Fig. 7b ) , indicating that pre-exposure to LPS induces broad hyporesponsiveness to bacterial stimulation . 
In contrast , infection with live salmonella but not stimulation with lipopeptide , 
LPS or heat-inactivated salmonella induced strong production of IL-1b in tolerant macrophages ( Fig. 7c , d ) . 
Immunoprecipitation experiments veriﬁed that the IL-1b detected in culture supernatants was the proteolytically cleaved IL-1b form in wild-type cells but that this was absent in supernatants from Ipaf-deﬁcient macrophages ( Supplementary Fig. 3 online ) . 
Notably , about 10 -- 20 times more IL-1b was secreted in response to infection with salmonella in LPS-tolerized macrophages than in naive macrophages ( Fig. 7d ) . 
As noted in nontolerized macrophages , the mutant salmonella strain deﬁcient in ﬂagellin was severely deﬁcient in eliciting IL-1b production and caspase-1 activation ( Fig. 7e , f ) . 
These results indicate that live intracellular salmonella induces potent IL-1b secretion through recognition of ﬂagellin in macrophages that are refractory to TLR stimulation . 
DISCUSSION
Intracellular bacteria trigger immune responses distinct from those elicited by extracellular bacterial pathogens . 
For example , cytosolic recognition of listeria induces a gene expression program independent of TLR signaling20 ,21,32,33 . 
Cytosolic surveillance systems operating in host cells mediate the induction of multiple signaling pathways , including NF-kB activation , type I interferon production and protein ubiquitination20 ,21,34 . 
However , the molecules involved in recognizing intracellular bacteria and required for activation of immune response signaling pathways in the cytosol are poorly deﬁned . 
Here we have demonstrated that cytosolic recognition of salmonella triggered caspase-1 activation and IL-1b production from infected macrophages . 
Moreover , ﬂagellin was required for activation of cas-pase-1 and IL-1b secretion through the host protein Ipaf in response to salmonella infection . 
Activation of caspase-1 through Ipaf was independent of TLR5 , the pattern-recognition receptor that recognizes extracellular ﬂagellin25 . 
Consistent with the lack of requirement of TLR5 , macrophages insensitive to TLR stimulation ( tolerant macro-phages ) nevertheless activated caspase-1 after salmonella infection . 
There are several mechanisms by which ﬂagellin could induce the activation of caspase-1 through Ipaf . 
For example , ﬂagellin might enter the host cytosol through active secretion by the ` needle complex ' of the salmonella type III secretion apparatus , or ﬂagellin could enter the cytosol passively through pores formed in the phagosome membrane . 
Consistent with the former mechanism is the observation that salmonella requires SipB , a translocase of the type III secretion system , to induce caspase-1 and IL-1b secretion in infected cells10 . 
A similar mechanism has been proposed for the delivery of peptidoglycanderived molecules to the host cytosol by the Helicobacter pylori type IV secretion system , which activates Nod1 , another Nod-LRR family member , in infected cells35 . 
As for how Ipaf ` senses ' ﬂagellin , one possibility is that Ipaf binds ﬂagellin directly ; alternatively , the Ipaf-ﬂagellin interaction could require another host factor in the cytosol to promote the activation of caspase-1 . 
Both possibilities are supported by our ﬁnding that puriﬁed ﬂagellin delivered to the cytosol was sufﬁcient for the induction of caspase-1 activation in wild-type but not in Ipaf-deﬁcient macrophages . 
Ipaf might ` sense ' ﬂagellin indirectly , however , in a way similar to that proposed for the recognition of peptidoglycan-derived muropeptides by Nod1 and Nod2 ( ref . 
5 ) and by plant Nod-LRR homologs36 ,37 , for which recognition is transient and/or indirect ; such a possibility is consistent with lack of data showing a direct interaction between Ipaf and ﬂagellin in cell extracts by immunoprecipitation ( data not shown ) . 
Finally , ﬂagellin itself may not be recognized by Ipaf ; instead , cytosolic ﬂagellin could induce a cellular response factor that is sensed by Ipaf . 
Further studies are needed to fully understand the molecular mechanism by which ﬂagellin induces caspase-1 activation through Ipaf . 
Recognition of invasive bacteria via TLRs triggers the production of proinﬂammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor , IL-6 and IL-1b . 
Although appropriate amounts of these cytokines are critical for cell-mediated bacterial killing and activation of adaptive immunity , cytokines induce positive feedback in the immune system , and excessive production of cytokines can lead to severe immunopatho-logy38 ,39 . 
Thus , the induction of macrophage tolerance by LPS and other bacterial ligands is thought to be critical for host survival during bacterial infection or continuous exposure to bacterial molecules . 
The state of tolerance induced by exposure of macrophages to LPS is associated with profound impairment in the secretion of proinﬂammatory cytokines and activation of NF-kB and mitogen-activated protein kinases . 
Yet even in such tolerant macrophages , we found that caspase-1 activation and potent IL-1b secretion was nevertheless induced by salmonella infection . 
Suppression of signaling pathways associated with the tolerance state induced by LPS is mediated by inhibitory molecules that are induced by TLR signaling and that target membrane-associated signaling complexes40 . 
Thus , cytosolic signaling pathways required for caspase-1 activation in response to salmonella infection do not seem to be targeted for inhibition by these tolerance-inducing molecules , and this may explain at least in part why caspase-1 activation and IL-1b secretion proceeds normally in macrophages that are refractory to TLR stimulation . 
Induction of macrophage hyporesponsiveness by exposure to bacterial components protects the host from abnormal stimulation of the innate immune system , but it may also be deleterious to host defense when macrophages are infected by pathogenic bacteria41 . 
Cytosolic signaling induced through ﬂagellin and Ipaf might thus represent a mechanism for the infected macrophage to ` alert ' the immune system to the presence of an infectious agent inside the host cell in conditions in which TLR signaling is blocked . 
Several Nod-LRR proteins are predicted to be involved in the activation of caspase-1 activation in response to bacterial pathogens5 ; a possible explanation for this redundant function is to ensure the secretion of IL-1b and 
IL-18 during intracellular bacterial infection when TLR signaling is inhibited via tolerization . 
After binding to their receptors , IL-1b and 
IL-18 are known to induce signaling pathways that lead to the activation of lymphocytes and recruitment of leukocytes into sites of infection1 . 
In addition to being important in the host defense against bacteria , IL-1b can also be harmful if its production is uncontrolled42 . 
The production of IL-1RA , a molecule that antagonizes IL-1b signaling , is not substantially modiﬁed in LPS-tolerized macrophages43 , suggesting that regulatory mechanisms are in place to prevent deleterious effects induced by overproduction of IL-1b . 
METHODS
Mice . 
Ipaf deﬁciency was created by replacement of exons I and II of Card12 , encoding the Ipaf caspase-recruitment domain and N-terminal regions of Nod , with an IRES -- b-gal -- neomycin-resistance cassette , followed by homologous recombination in ES cells . 
Ipaf-deﬁcient ( null ) mice were generated by crossing of male and female Card12 + / -- mice . 
Ipaf-deﬁcient ( null ) and wild-type mice used in these experiments were on a mixed 129 -- C57BL/6J background . 
TLR5-deﬁcient mice on a C57BL/6 background were a gift from S. Akira ( Osaka University , Osaka , Japan ) and A. Gewirtz ( Emory University , Atlanta , Georgia ) . 
C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories . 
Mice were housed in a pathogen-free facility . 
Animal studies used protocols approved by the University of Michigan Committee on Use and Care of Animals ( Ann Arbor , Michigan ) . 
Reagents and bacterial infection . 
LPS was from E. coli O55 : B5 ( Sigma ) ; synthetic bacterial basic lipopeptide ( Pam3Cys-Ser-Lys4-OH ) was from Invivogen . 
Listeria wild-type strain and10403S and mutant listeria containing an inframe deletion of hly ( LLO deﬁcient ; DP-L2161 ) were a gift of M. O'Riordan ( University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , Michigan ) . 
S. enterica serovar typhimur-ium strain SL1344 and the isogenic orgA mutant strain BJ66 ( SipB deﬁcient ) were a gift from D. Monack ( Stanford University , Stanford , California ) . 
The ﬂhDC strain was provided by M. Macnab ( Yale University , New Haven , Connecticut ) . 
The ﬂiC-ﬂjB , ﬂiC , ﬂjB and ﬂiC I411A salmonella strains were a gift from A. Aderem ( University of Washington , Seattle , Washington ) . 
E. coli K-12 strains DP-E3616 and DP-E3617 ( a gift from M. O'Riordan ) were 44 cultured as described . 
Salmonella culture is described in the Supplementary Methods online . 
Preparation of mouse macrophages . 
BMDMs were prepared as described45 . 
Bone marrow cells were cultured for 5 d with IMDM supplemented with 30 % 
L929 supernatant containing macrophage-stimulating factor , glutamine , sodium pyruvate , 10 % heat-inactivated FBS ( Gibco-BRL ) and antibiotics . 
Peritoneal macrophages were elicited by injection of 4 % thioglycolate solution and were collected by peritoneal lavage 4 or 5 d later . 
Adherent macrophages were prepared by overnight culture in IMDM supplemented with 10 % heat-inactivated FBS and antibiotics . 
Stimulation of macrophages with liposomes . 
DOTAP cationic lipid was purchased from Roche and was used accordingly to the manufacturer 's instructions . 
DOTAP ( 50 ml ) was incubated for 30 min in serum-free media with 2 mg puriﬁed ﬂagellin ( Invivogen ) . 
After incubation , 3.5 ml serum-free media was added and an aliquot of 500 ml was used to stimulate macrophages 6 ( 1 10 , seeded in 12-well plates ) for 3 h. 
Macrophage cytotoxicity assay . 
The percentage of macrophage death was determined by measurement of the release of macrophage LDH 16 h after infection with the CytoTox 96 nonradioactive cytotoxicity assay ( Promega ) . 
The absorbance at 490 nm was measured , and the percentage of cell death was calculated as follows : [ ( experimental release -- spontaneous release ) / ( maximum release-spontaneous release ) ] 100 , where ` spontaneous release ' is from the cytoplasm of uninfected macrophages and ` maximum release ' is the value obtained by lysis of macrophages with a solution of 0.1 % Triton-X100 . 
Induction of macrophage priming and tolerization . 
Cells were cultured in 48-well plates at a density of 8 104 cells/well or in 6-well plates at a density of 2 106 cells/well . 
The day after being plated , cells were treated with LPS 
( 100 ng/ml ) or heat-inactivated salmonella ( at a concentration of 10 bacteria per macrophage ) for 4 h for priming or 24 h for tolerization . 
Immunoblot and immunoprecipitation . 
Cells were lysed in buffer containing 1 % Nonidet-P40 supplemented with complete protease inhibitor ` cocktail ' ( Roche ) and 2 mM dithiothreitol . 
Lysates were resolved by SDS-PAGE and were transferred to polyvinyldiﬂuoride membranes by electroblotting . 
Rabbit antibody to mouse caspase-1 has been described13 . 
Antibodies to mouse IkBa , phosphorylated IkBa , p38 and phosphorylated p38 were from Cell Signaling . 
For immunoprecipitation , culture supernatants from macrophages infected with salmonella were mixed with an equal volume of lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors . 
Lysates were incubated overnight at 40 1C with goat antibody to mouse IL-1b ( clone AF-401-NA ; R&D Systems ) and protein A-G agarose beads ( Pierce ) . 
Immunoprecipitates were analyzed by immunoblot with antibody to mouse IL-1b . 
Measurement of cytokines . 
Mouse cytokines were measured in culture supernatants with enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay ( ELISA ) kits ( R&D Systems ) . 
The authors declare that they have no competing ﬁnancial interests.
Published online at http://www.nature.com/natureimmunology/
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/ reprintsandpermissions / 
1 . 
Dinarello , C.A. Biologic basis for interleukin-1 in disease . 
Blood 87 , 2095 -- 2147 ( 1996 ) . 
2 . 
Thornberry , N.A. et al. . 
A novel heterodimeric cysteine protease is required for inter-leukin-1b processing in monocytes . 
Nature 356 , 768 -- 774 ( 1992 ) . 
3 . 
Schmitz , J. et al. . 
IL-33 , an interleukin-1-like cytokine that signals via the IL-1 receptorrelated protein ST2 and induces T helper type 2-associated cytokines . 
Immunity 23 , 479 -- 490 ( 2005 ) . 
4 . 
Martinon , F. , Burns , K. & Tschopp , J . 
The inﬂammasome : a molecular platform triggering activation of inﬂammatory caspases and processing of proIL-b . 
Mol . 
Cell 10 , 417 -- 426 ( 2002 ) . 
5 . 
Inohara , N. , Chamaillard , M. , McDonald , C. & Nunez , G. NOD-LRR proteins : role in host-microbial interactions and inﬂammatory disease . 
Annu . 
Rev. Biochem . 
74 , 355 -- 383 ( 2005 ) . 
6 . 
Ting , J.P. & Davis , B.K. CATERPILLER : a novel gene family important in immunity , cell death , and diseases . 
Annu . 
Rev. Immunol . 
23 , 387 -- 414 ( 2005 ) . 
7 . 
Martinon , F. & Tschopp , J. Inﬂammatory caspases : linking an intracellular innate immune system to autoinﬂammatory diseases . 
Cell 117 , 561 -- 574 ( 2004 ) . 
8 . 
Poyet , J.L. et al. . 
Identiﬁcation of Ipaf , a human caspase-1-activating protein related to Apaf-1 . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
276 , 28309 -- 28313 ( 2001 ) . 
9 . 
Agostini , L. et al. . 
NALP3 forms an IL-1b-processing inﬂammasome with increased activity in Muckle-Wells autoinﬂammatory disorder . 
Immunity 20 , 319 -- 325 ( 2004 ) . 
10 . 
Mariathasan , S. et al. . 
Differential activation of the inﬂammasome by caspase-1 adaptors ASC and Ipaf . 
Nature 430 , 213 -- 218 ( 2004 ) . 
11 . 
Mariathasan , S. , Weiss , D.S. , Dixit , V.M. & Monack , D.M. Innate immunity against Francisella tularensis is dependent on the ASC/caspase -1 axis . 
J. Exp . 
Med . 
202 , 1043 -- 1049 ( 2005 ) . 
12 . 
Mariathasan , S. et al. . 
Cryopyrin activates the inﬂammasome in response to toxins and ATP . 
Nature ( 2006 ) . 
13 . 
Ozoren , N. et al. . 
Distinct roles of TLR2 and the adaptor ASC in IL-1b / IL-18 secretion in response to Listeria monocytogenes . 
J. Immunol . 
176 , 4337 -- 4342 ( 2006 ) . 
14 . 
Kanneganti , T.D. et al. . 
Bacterial RNA and small antiviral compounds activate caspase-1 through cryopyrin/Nalp3 . 
Nature 440 , 233 -- 236 ( 2006 ) . 
15 . 
Sato , S. et al. . 
A variety of microbial components induce tolerance to lipopolysaccharide by differentially affecting MyD88-dependent and - independent pathways . 
Int . 
Immu-nol . 
14 , 783 -- 791 ( 2002 ) . 
16 . 
Masumoto , J. et al. . 
ASC is an activating adaptor for NF-kB and caspase-8-dependent apoptosis . 
Biochem . 
Biophys . 
Res . 
Commun . 
303 , 69 -- 73 ( 2003 ) . 
17 . 
Hersh , D. et al. . 
The Salmonella invasin SipB induces macrophage apoptosis by binding to caspase-1 . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 96 , 2396 -- 2401 ( 1999 ) . 
18 . 
Galan , J.E. & Collmer , A. Type III secretion machines : bacterial devices for protein delivery into host cells . 
Science 284 , 1322 -- 1328 ( 1999 ) . 
19 . 
Portnoy , D.A. , Auerbuch , V. & Glomski , I.J. . 
The cell biology of Listeria monocytogenes infection : the intersection of bacterial pathogenesis and cell-mediated immunity . 
J. Cell Biol . 
158 , 409 -- 414 ( 2002 ) . 
20 . 
McCaffrey , R.L. et al. . 
A speciﬁc gene expression program triggered by Gram-positive bacteria in the cytosol . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 101 , 11386 -- 11391 ( 2004 ) . 
21 . 
O'Riordan , M. , Yi , C.H. , Gonzales , R. , Lee , K.D. & Portnoy , D.A. Innate recognition of bacteria by a macrophage cytosolic surveillance pathway . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 99 , 13861 -- 13866 ( 2002 ) . 
22 . 
Komoriya , K. et al. . 
Flagellar proteins and type III-exported virulence factors are the predominant proteins secreted into the culture media of Salmonella typhimurium . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
34 , 767 -- 779 ( 1999 ) . 
23 . 
Chilcott , G.S. & Hughes , K.T. Coupling of ﬂagellar gene expression to ﬂagellar assembly in Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium and Escherichia coli . 
Microbiol . 
Mol . 
Biol . 
Rev. 64 , 694 -- 708 ( 2000 ) .