Salmonella typhimurium Infection in Nonobese Diabetic Mice Generates Immunomodulatory Dendritic Cells Able to Prevent Type 1 Diabetes
This information is current as of October 18 , 2018 . 
Tim Raine , Paola Zaccone , Pietro Mastroeni and Anne Cooke 
J Immunol 2006 ; 177:2224 -2233 ; ; doi : 10.4049 / jimmunol .177.4.2224 
http://www.jimmunol.org/content/177/4/2224 
References This article cites 47 articles , 24 of which you can access for free at : http://www.jimmunol.org/content/177/4/2224.full#ref-list-1 
Why The JI ? 
Submit online . 
• Rapid Reviews ! 
30 days * from submission to initial decision 
• No Triage ! 
Every submission reviewed by practicing scientists 
• Fast Publication ! 
4 weeks from acceptance to publication 
* average 
Subscription 
Information about subscribing to The Journal of Immunology is online at : http://jimmunol.org/subscription 
Permissions Submit copyright permission requests at : http://www.aai.org/About/Publications/JI/copyright.html 
Email Alerts Receive free email-alerts when new articles cite this article . 
Sign up at : http://jimmunol.org/alerts 
The Journal of Immunology is published twice each month by The American Association of Immunologists , Inc. , 1451 Rockville Pike , Suite 650 , Rockville , MD 20852 Copyright © 2006 by The American Association of Immunologists All rights reserved . 
Print ISSN : 0022-1767 Online ISSN : 1550-6606 . 
T
he effects of exposure to infectious agents on the subsequent development of autoimmunity represent a wellstudied , but controversial ﬁeld ( 1 -- 3 ) . 
Using a mouse model of type 1 diabetes ( T1D ) ,3 we recently demonstrated that infection with an attenuated strain of Salmonella typhimurium could halt the development of spontaneous T1D in the NOD mouse ( 4 ) . 
Although the infection is cleared by the mice within 6 wk , the protection from T1D is long lasting . 
A number of different infectious agents have also been shown to inhibit development of T1D in these mice , including viral ( 5 ) , bacterial ( 6 ) , and helminthic ( 7 ) pathogens , but we believe that the effects of S. typhimurium infection are particularly interesting , as this infection shows strong protective effects even when exposure to the bacteria occurs well after the establishment of the initial leukocytic pancreatic inﬁltrates . 
In our previous work , we demonstrated that autoreactive T cells remained present in the protected mice , because , even at late time points after infection , splenocytes from these mice could transfer T1D to immunodeﬁcient recipient NOD.scid mice . 
When taken together with the observed patterns of Th1 cytokine secretion , these results indicated that neither deletion of autoreactive T cells , their deviation to a pattern of Th2 cytokine secretion , nor their regulation via the induction of IL-10-secreting regulatory T cells 
* Department of Pathology , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , United Kingdom ; and † Centre for Veterinary Science , Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , United Kingdom Received for publication February 2 , 2006 . 
Accepted for publication June 2 , 2006 . 
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . 
This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . 
1 T.R. is funded by Trinity College ( Cambridge , U.K. ) and the University of Cambridge MB PhD Programme . 
P.Z. is supported by Diabetes U.K. Work in the laboratories of P.M. and A.C. is funded by Diabetes U.K. , the U.K. Medical Research Council , and the Wellcome Trust . 
2 Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Anne Cooke , Department of Pathology , University of Cambridge , Tennis Court Road , Cambridge CB2 1QP , U.K. E-mail address : ac@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk 3 Abbreviations used in this paper : T1D , type 1 diabetes ; Ct , cycle threshold ; CY , cyclophosphamide ; DC , dendritic cell ; HPRT , hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase ; int , intermediate ; PLN , pancreatic lymph node . 
could explain the prevention of pancreatic islet destruction . 
Instead , we observed sustained alterations in the frequency of NKT cells and subset distribution of dendritic cells ( DCs ) . 
DCs are known to play a role in a number of stages in a S. typhimurium infection , including the rapid phagocytosis of blood-borne Salmo-nellae ( 8 ) and contributing to the eradication of infection by the production of reactive nitrogen intermediates ( 9 ) . 
Early in infection , their subset ratios are changed in the spleen , with an apparent expansion and redistribution of the CD8 population ( 10 ) . 
DCs have also become well established as controllers of the T cell adaptive immune response , endowed with the capacity to prime naive T cells ( 11 ) , but additionally to direct and coordinate the ongoing response through several means ( 12 ) . 
We investigated the role of Salmonella-modulated DCs in the protection from T1D . 
Using an in vivo approach , we report that DCs from previously infected NOD mice were protective against the development of diabetes in a model of cyclophosphamide ( CY ) - induced T1D , in which the disease process is accelerated and synchronized ( 13 ) . 
DCs from noninfected littermate control mice did not afford any protection in this system . 
DCs generated in vitro from bone marrow or manipulated ex vivo have previously been used to protect in animal models from autoimmunity ( 14 -- 18 ) . 
However , we believe this to be the ﬁrst study to show protection from an autoimmune disease using DCs that have been exposed in vivo to a physiological stimulus , but not using their unexposed counterparts . 
Additionally , in this study , we report evidence for changes in autoreactive T cell priming in the pancreatic lymph nodes ( PLN ) of previously infected mice and a block on their entry into the pancreas . 
This altered tissue distribution of autoreactive T cells is accompanied by changes in the expression patterns of certain chemokines , notably CCL21a . 
Finally , we link these differences in T cell trafﬁcking to alterations in DCs after infection that we suggest might underlie the protection from T1D . 
Materials and Methods
Mice, drugs, and bacteria
NOD , BDC2 .5 NOD , and GFP.BDC2 .5 NOD mice were bred and maintained under barrier conditions in the Pathology Department , University of Cambridge animal facilities . 
GFP.NOD mice used to breed 
Salmonella typhimurium Infection in Nonobese Diabetic Mice 
Generates Immunomodulatory Dendritic Cells Able to Prevent Diabetes1 
Type 1 
Tim Raine , * Paola Zaccone , * Pietro Mastroeni , † and Anne Cooke2 * 
Infection , commencing across a wide age range , with a live , attenuated strain of Salmonella typhimurium , will halt the development of type 1 diabetes in the NOD mouse . 
The protective mechanism appears to involve the regulation of autoreactive T cells in a manner associated with long lasting changes in the innate immune compartment of these mice . 
We show in this study that autoreactive T cell priming and trafﬁcking are altered in mice that have been infected previously by S. typhimurium . 
These changes are associated with sustained alterations in patterns of chemokine expression . 
We ﬁnd that small numbers of dendritic cells from mice that have been previously infected with , but cleared all trace of a S. typhimurium infection are able to prevent the development of diabetes in the highly synchronized and aggressive cyclophosphamide-induced model . 
The effects we observe on autoreactive T cell trafﬁcking are recapitulated by the immunomodulatory dendritic cell transfers in the cyclophosphamide model . 
The Journal of Immunology , 2006 , 177 : 2224 -- 2233 . 
0022-1767/06 / $ 02.00 
Copyright © 2006 by The American Association of Immunologists , Inc. . 
GFP.BDC2 .5 NOD mice were a gift from D. Kioussis ( National Institute of Medical Research , London ) . 
Brieﬂy , GFP-S65T plasmid DNA was obtained from Quantum . 
The GFP cDNA was isolated by digestion with SacI-EcoRV before treatment with Klenow polymerase . 
The blunted GFP cDNA was then cloned into the SmaI site of the human CD2 VA vector . 
For the generation of transgenic mice , the injection fragment was digested away from the vector sequences ( KpnI-XbaI for human CD2-GFP ) and gel puriﬁed . 
The isolated fragment was further puriﬁed using Elutip columns . 
Pronuclei of fertilized oocytes from NOD mice were injected with the puriﬁed DNA at a concentration of 1 -- 2 g/ml TE buffer . 
Transgenic founders were detected by Southern blot analysis of genomic tail DNA . 
All animal work was conducted after approval by the Ethical Review Committee of the University of Cambridge . 
CY ( Baxter ) was given at 200 mg/kg i.p. Mice given CY were monitored daily for glycosuria and sacriﬁced after two successive positive readings . 
For some experiments , groups of NOD mice were given CY and sacriﬁced at various time points after dosing , for analysis of splenocyte populations by ﬂow cytometry . 
S. typhimurium SL3261 were grown and prepared for i.v. injection at 5 105 CFU , as described previously ( 4 ) . 
Salmonella Ags were prepared , as described previously ( 4 ) . 
Cellular puriﬁcation
Splenic DCs were prepared using CD11c microbeads ( Miltenyi Biotec ) , according to the manufacturer 's instructions . 
Brieﬂy , spleens were cut into fragments and digested in medium containing Liberase CI ( Boehringer Mannheim ) . 
DC-T cell complexes were then disrupted by the addition of EDTA ( 0.1 M ( pH 7.3 ) ) . 
Splenic fragments were forced through a nylon cell strainer ( BD Biosciences ) , and the resulting suspension was washed . 
Cell pellets were resuspended in cold buffer ( PBS , 0.5 % BSA , 2 mM EDTA ) with CD11c microbeads , before being washed in buffer . 
Cells were then passed twice through LS columns ( Miltenyi Biotec ) for the selection of high purity CD11c cells . 
DCs were checked for CD11c staining by FACS , and cell samples were discarded if the purity was 95 % or if combined CD3 and CD19 contamination exceeded 3 % . 
For experiments using DCs prepared by negative selection , cells were incubated with a mixture of biotinylated Abs to CD19 , CD90 .1 , TCR - , CD3 , DX5 , Ter119 , Gr1 , F4/80 ( all from BD Pharmingen ) , and IgG/M ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories ) . 
Abs were used at 0.125 l per 106 estimated target cells . 
To minimize sodium azide toxicity , Abs were dialyzed over-night into PBS using the slide-a-lyzer dialysis cassette system ( Pierce ) . 
After washing Ab-labeled cells , a subsequent incubation was performed with biotinylated polyclonal goat anti-rat Igs ( Serotec ) to maximize biotin labeling of target cells . 
Cells were then washed and incubated with strepta-vidin-coated Dynal beads ( Invitrogen Life Technologies ) at a ratio of 6 beads/cell . 
All incubations were performed for 20 min at 4 °C with continuous gentle agitation using a rotor . 
Labeled cells and surplus beads were then removed from cell suspensions using a magnet supplied by the manufacturer in a series of repeat depletion steps . 
Unlabeled cells were left free in suspension and used for subsequent cell transfers . 
In all experiments involving DC transfers , 5 105 puriﬁed DCs were injected i.v. into a lateral tail vein 48 h after the administration of CY . 
CD4 T cells were prepared from single-cell suspensions of splenocytes incubated with a biotin-conjugated Ab depletion mixture for nonCD4 lineage cells ( Miltenyi Biotec ) before anti-biotin microbeads ( Miltenyi ) were added . 
LD columns ( Miltenyi Biotec ) were then used for the negative selection of CD4 T cells , samples being checked by FACS to ensure high purity . 
Cell culture 
Ct average Ctgene of study average CtHPRT 
with : 
and fold change in expression expressed as : 
For assessment of carryover of Salmonella Ags , samples of puriﬁed splenic DCs from the inocula given to CY-treated mice were used . 
DCs were combined in 96-well round-bottom plates ( Falcon ) with splenic T cells puriﬁed as described above at a ratio of 10 T cells to 1 DC , with 2 105 T cells/well . 
To some wells , exogenous C5 Ag was added at 1 g/ml . 
Supernatants were removed at 24 h for assessment of IL-2 production using a sandwich ELISA , according to the manufacturer 's instructions ( R&D Systems ) . 
For DC culture , puriﬁed DCs were cultured in a 96-well ﬂat-bottom plate ( Falcon ) at 5 104 cells/well . 
To some wells , 200 ng/ml LPS ( Sigma-Aldrich ) was added . 
After 24 h , supernatants were harvested for the determination of cytokine concentration by ﬂow cytometry using the cytometric bead array assay ( BD Pharmingen ) , according to the manufacturer 's instructions . 
Investigation of autoreactive T cell fate 
Single-cell suspensions of splenic lymphocytes from BDC2 .5 NOD or from GFP.BDC2 .5 NOD mice were prepared , and RBC lysed in ammonium chloride buffer . 
For CFSE labeling , cells were incubated in PBS with 5 M CFSE ( Molecular Probes ) . 
For transfers , 1 107 cells were injected into a lateral tail vein of mice treated as indicated in ﬁgure legends . 
Mice were sacriﬁced 72 h later , and spleens , pancreata , and pancreatic and mesenteric lymph nodes were harvested and single-cell suspensions were prepared , as described previously ( 4 ) . 
Flow cytometric analysis
Nonspeciﬁc binding was blocked by incubation with Ab clone 2.4 G2 . 
For analysis of DC populations , spleens were ﬁrst cut into small fragments and digested with frequent mixing for 25 min at 37 °C in medium containing Liberase CI ( Boehringer Mannheim ) before DC-T cell complexes were disrupted by the addition of 0.1 M EDTA ( pH 7.3 ) . 
Cells were stained in buffer ( PBS containing 2 % BSA and 0.05 % NaN3 ) with combinations of PE , PerCP , allophycocyanin , or biotinylated conjugates of : anti-CD3 ( 2C11 ) , anti-CD4 ( RM4-5 ) , anti-CD25 ( PC61 ) , anti-CD62L ( MEL-14 ) , anti-CD44 ( IM7 ) , anti-CD80 ( 16-10A1 ) , anti-CD86 ( GL1 ) , anti-CCR5 ( C34-3448 ) ( all from BD Pharmingen ) , CCR7 ( 4B12 ; AbCam ) , CXCR3 ( 220803 ; R&D Systems ) , pan MHC-II ( OX6 ; Serotec ) , and appropriate isotype control Abs . 
Biotinylated Abs were detected with a streptavidin-allophycocyanin . 
Cy7 conjugate . 
Cells were then washed and analyzed using a BD LSR I ﬂow cytometer ( BD Biosciences ) . 
Analysis of chemokine expression
Spleens , PLN , and pancreata were harvested into RNAlater ( Qiagen ) . 
mRNA extraction was performed using the RNAEasy Kit ( Qiagen ) , according to the manufacturer 's protocol . 
On-column DNase digests were performed ( Qiagen ) to remove any residual contaminating genomic DNA . 
All ﬁnal RNA yields and purities were checked by measuring A260 : A280 values using a quartz cuvette and spectrophotometer ( model DU-62 ; BD Biosciences ) . 
Quantitative RT-PCR was performed as a one-step process using prepared RNA and SYBR-green-based detection of PCR products after the reverse-transcriptase step , according to the manufacturer 's protocols ( Qiagen ) . 
Ampliﬁcation and detection were performed using an ABI 7500 Real Time PCR System ( Applied Biosystems ) . 
Reactions were run using Quantitec preoptimized PCR primers ( Qiagen ) for genes of interest . 
These were CCL2 , CCL3 , CCL4 , CCL5 , CCL17 , CCL19 , CCL20 , CCL21a , CCL22 , CXCL10 , and CXCL16 . 
Reactions were set up in triplicate on 96-well plates and SYBR-green levels in each well normalized to levels of the passive reference dye , ROX , to correct for pipetting errors . 
After ampliﬁcation , melting curve analysis was used to check for contamination and primer dimerization . 
Average cycle threshold ( Ct ) values were determined for each reaction by determining the cycle number at which SYBR-green ﬂuorescence crossed a threshold level set during the log-linear ampliﬁcation phase , and Ct values determined by comparison with the reference gene hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase ( HPRT ) as : 
For comparison of expression levels between tissues of individual mice , Ct values were compared to generate Ct values as follows : Ct Cttissue of interest Cttissue of reference 
fold change Ct tissue of interest vs tissue of reference 2 
Statistics
SD Ct SD2 2 Ct gene of study SD CtHPRT
Values are reported as 2 Ct SD , according to the methods described by Livak and Schmittgen ( 19 ) . 
Appropriate statistical tests were performed on all data , as described in the ﬁgure legends . 
Results
DCs from mice previously infected with S. typhimurium can prevent diabetes in an accelerated, synchronized model
Our previous observations suggested that in NOD mice protected from T1D after a S. typhimurium infection , alterations within the innate immune compartment might be responsible for exerting some form of regulatory control on an otherwise functional auto-reactive T cell repertoire ( 4 ) . 
To test this , we transferred low doses of puriﬁed splenic DCs to recipient mice in which the diabetic process had been accelerated and synchronized by the administration of a single dose of CY 48 h earlier . 
Transfer of DCs from mice that had been infected with attenuated S. typhimurium 8 wk previously signiﬁcantly decreased the incidence of diabetes in the recipient mice ( Fig. 1 ) . 
Mice given DCs from noninfected littermate control mice showed no signiﬁcant changes in the kinetics of the disease process , and a similar ﬁnal incidence to mice that received only CY ( Fig. 1 ) . 
Similar protection was observed when using DCs prepared by negative selection , as described in Materials and Methods , in transfer experiments designed to rule out the possibility that the effects observed might be due to a non-DC CD11c-expressing population , such as DX5 NK cells ( data not shown ) . 
To understand better the phenotype of the DCs used for these transfers , we used ﬂow cytometry and cell culture . 
No differences were seen in the parameters studied between the DCs of NOD mice exposed to S. typhimurium infection 8 wk earlier and their noninfected littermate controls , both in terms of activation marker expression and cytokine levels in culture supernatants after 24 h of exposure to an inﬂammatory stimulus ( Fig. 2 ) . 
DCs from S. typhimurium-exposed mice do not bear detectable S. typhimurium Ags Although we ﬁnd that NOD mice clear the S. typhimurium infection within 6 wk , we determined whether the transferred DCs harbored surviving Salmonellae . 
There were , as expected , no surviving bacteria detectable by bacterial growth on agar plates in any of the DC preparations taken at the time of our transfer studies . 
To further exclude carryover of Ag , we used a reporter population of presensitized T cells from NOD mice infected with S. typhimurium 8 wk earlier , which will mount a strong anti-Salmonella memory response to an antigenic extract from S. typhimurium ( 4 ) . 
As shown in Fig. 3 , when these Salmonella-immune T cells were mixed with puriﬁed populations of splenic DCs from previously infected and control NOD mice , no T cell response was observed in the absence of exogenously added Salmonella Ags . 
Both populations of DCs could present exogenously added Salmonella Ags with equal efﬁciency , and the response was Salmonella speciﬁc , because T cells from the noninfected mice did not respond . 
This indicates that DCs from previously infected mice do not present any Salmonella Ags that might have remained after the clearance of the live infection . 
FIGURE 1 . 
DCs from mice exposed to a prior S. typhimurium infection reduce the incidence of T1D in CY-treated mice . 
Ten - to 12-wk-old NOD mice were given CY , and 48 h later , 5 105 splenic DCs from 16-wk-old female NOD mice that had been exposed to S. typhimurium infection 8 wk previously ( E ) , or their nondiabetic littermate controls ( Œ ) . 
A third group received CY , but no cells ( ) . 
The reduction in incidence in the recipients of Salmonella DCs was signiﬁcant when compared with the recipients of control DCs ( p 0.002 ) and mice receiving no cells ( p 0.014 ) . 
Results are from one experiment , n 7 mice per group , representative of four repeat experiments . 
Two-sided p values are by a Mantel-Haenszel test of Kaplan Meier survival curves . 
Impact of CY on DC populations in NOD mice
To examine the effects that CY might be having on DCs in the recipient mice , we performed a series of serial time course analyses in cohorts of NOD mice given a single dose of CY ( Fig. 4 ) . 
As expected , we found a decrease in splenic cellularity , recovering to normal levels by day 9 after dosing ( Fig. 4A ) . 
However , the relative decrease in cell number was not more signiﬁcant for DCs than for T cells , the ratio of T cells to DCs remaining relatively constant after CY administration ( Fig. 4B ) . 
Additionally , expression of MHC class II increased in the period after CY administration ( Fig. 4C ) , matching the timing of the introduction of the immunomodulatory DC population in the transfer experiments described above . 
FIGURE 2 . 
A -- F , Phenotypic analysis of DCs as used in transfer experiment . 
Single-cell suspensions were prepared from 16-wk-old female NOD mice infected with S. typhimurium at 8 wk of age ( n 5 ) and their noninfected , nondiabetic littermate controls ( n 5 ) . 
A -- C , Flow cytometric analysis of surface expression levels of A , MHC class II ; B , CD80 ; C , CD86 expressed as geometric mean ﬂuorescence intensity on CD11c cells . 
Values are for individual mice ; bars represent arithmetic means . 
p values by Mann-Whitney U testing were nonsigniﬁcant in all instances . 
D -- F , Puriﬁed DCs from individual mice previously exposed to S. typhimurium ( ) and littermate controls ( f ) were cultured in triplicate wells at 5 104 cells/well in medium alone or in the presence of 200 ng ml 1 LPS . 
Supernatants were harvested at 24 h and analyzed for levels of TNF - ( D ) , IL-6 ( E ) , and IL-10 ( F ) by cytometric bead array . 
All results shown are means SEM for mean values from triplicate wells ( i.e. , means of means ) . 
Statistical testing by two-sided Student 's t test shows LPS up-regulated expression of all cytokines ( p 0.0001 ) , but does not show any signiﬁcant differences between DCs taken from the two different groups of mice . 
Autoreactive T cell proliferation , activation , and homing differ in NOD mice previously infected with S. typhimurium Alterations in immune function of cells of the innate immune system might be expected to lead to differences in Ag presentation and might therefore inﬂuence autoreactive T cells . 
To examine the potential inﬂuence of DC alterations on such T cells , we transferred CFSE-labeled splenocytes from the BDC2 .5 NOD transgenic mouse ( 20 ) into previously infected and noninfected littermate control groups of NOD mice and then studied expansion , expression of T cell activation markers , and cytokines after 72 h. Before transfer , the CFSE-labeled CD4 T cell population consisted mostly of cells with a naive phenotype , expressing CD62L and intermediate levels of CD44 ( Fig. 5D ) . 
In a typical transfer experiment , 10 % of transferred CD4 T cells expressed surface CD25 ( data not shown ) . 
Seventy-two hours after cell transfer , recipient mice were sacriﬁced , and donor CD4 T cells were identiﬁed in the harvested organs based upon CFSE labeling . 
Dilution of the CFSE label , corresponding to cell proliferation , was restricted to CD4 T cells in the PLN of recipient mice . 
In the PLN , undivided CD4 cells include a population of Ag-inexperienced cells that retain expression of the surface marker CD62L ( Fig. 5 , A and B ) . 
These cells are CD25 and CD44int , but upon initial activation , will cleave surface CD62L and up-regulate CD44 ( Fig. 5C ) . 
Dividing cells are almost entirely CD62LlowCD44high and include both CD25 and CD25 populations ( Fig. 5C ) . 
Overall , the proliferation kinetics were apparently similar in both groups of recipient mice , with similar percentages of cells showing dilution of the CFSE label ( Fig. 5 , A and B ) . 
Interestingly , we found that the nonproliferating ( CFSEhigh ) population of CD4 BDC2 .5 . 
NOD T cells in the PLN of mice that had been infected with S. typhi-murium 8 wk previously contained a signiﬁcantly larger population of naive CD62LhighCD25 CD44int cells ( Fig. 5E ) than the equivalent population in the noninfected control littermates . 
This suggests that less effective activation was occurring in these mice , despite the apparently similar proliferation kinetics . 
However , we also found that in the PLN of the S. typhimurium-infected mice , a larger fraction of the proliferating CD4 BDC2 .5 . 
NOD cells stained for intracellular IFN - after nonspeciﬁc restimulation in vitro ( data not shown ) . 
This may reﬂect bystander activation in a strongly Th1-polarized environment . 
Previously , we have shown that despite the block on the development of T1D in mice infected with S. typhimurium , pancreatic inﬁltrates still develop in these mice ( 4 ) . 
Therefore , we used ﬂow cytometry to determine whether any of the transferred CFSE-la-beled BDC2 .5 . 
NOD splenocytes were among the pancreatic inﬁltrating lymphocytes . 
Although we could observe these cells in the pancreas of the noninfected control mice 72 h after transfer , we were consistently unable to detect any CFSE T cells in the pancreas of mice that had been infected with S. typhimurium 8 wk previously ( Fig. 6 ) . 
This was despite the presence of similar relative levels of transferred cells within the PLN of both groups of recipient mice ( Fig. 6D ) . 
Taken together , we regard these changes to indicate that in mice previously infected with S. typhimurium , autoantigen presentation is somehow altered within those lymph nodes known to be important for T cell priming in T1D ( 21 ) . 
Consequently , autoreactive T cells receive subtly different signals that result in a diminished ability of these cells to access the tissues of the pancreas . 
FIGURE 3 . 
DCs from mice exposed to a S. typhimurium infection do not bear detectable Salmonella Ags 8 wk after infection . 
DCs were puriﬁed from the pooled spleens of 16-wk-old female NOD mice that had been exposed to S. typhimurium infection 8 wk previously or their nondiabetic littermate controls ( n 3 per group ) and 2 104 DCs combined with 2 105 puriﬁed CD4 T cells from the same mice . 
Exogenous Salmonella Ag extract was added , as indicated , to some wells . 
After 24 h , supernatants were tested for IL-2 . 
C , Indicates T cells or DCs taken from control mice ; S , from the previously infected group . 
Results are means SD from triplicate wells . 
FIGURE 4 . 
A -- C , Effects of CY on DC in vivo . 
Ten-wk-old NOD mice were given CY ( 200 mg kg 1 ) and sacriﬁced 2 days ( d2 ) , 6 days ( d6 ) , or 9 days ( d9 ) after dosing for comparison with untreated ( d0 ) controls . 
Sin-gle-cell suspensions from each mouse were analyzed by ﬂow cytometry for surface marker expression . 
A , Total spleen lymphocyte counts . 
B , Ratio of absolute numbers of splenocytes staining CD3 to splenocytes staining CD11c . 
C , Geometric mean ﬂuorescence intensity of staining for MHC class II on CD11c . 
Means and results for individual mice are plotted . 
Because n 3 results per time point , two-sided Mann-Whitney U testing does not return any signiﬁcant p values . 
However , results are representative of two repeat experiments . 
FIGURE 5 . 
A -- E , Differences in autoreactive T cell phenotype after transfer into previously infected animals . 
A total of 1 107 CFSE-labeled BDC2 .5 . 
NOD splenocytes was transferred into 16-wk-old female NOD mice that had been exposed to S. typhimurium infection 8 wk previously or their nondiabetic littermate controls . 
The mice were sacriﬁced 72 h later , and proliferation restricted to the PLN was conﬁrmed during phenotypic analysis by FACS . 
A and B , Representative FACS data showing levels of CD62L expression on transferred CD4 cells in PLN of control ( A ) and previously infected ( B ) mice . 
Plots are gated on CD4 CFSEint-high cells ; percentages shown are for events falling within indicated quadrants . 
C , Representative data for CD25/CD44 expression on PLN CFSEint-high T cell populations in B. CD4 cells falling within the upper right , lower right , and lower left quadrants of B ( respectively representing undivided CD62Lhigh cells , undivided CD62Llow cells , and CD62Llow cells that have divided ) are shown in the correspondingly situated panel . 
Note that a similar distribution pattern is seen for the same populations in A. D , Representative data for CD44/CD62L expression in the CD4 population of BDC2 .5 . 
NOD splenocytes after CFSE labeling , immediately before transfer . 
E , Comparison of activation status of T cells 72 h after transfer in the two groups of mice . 
Transferred T cells were identiﬁed as CD4 CFSEint-high , and the percentage of them showing a naive phenotype ( deﬁned as CD62LhighCD44intCD25 ) expressed as a percentage of the whole population . 
The percentage of CD4 T cells with a similar phenotype in the cell population before transfer is shown for comparison ( pre-transfer ) . 
Results plotted are for individual mice from one experiment , representative of two separate studies . 
Lines indicate arithmetic means , and p values are by two-sided Mann-Whitney U test . 
Changes in chemokine expression patterns in S. typhimuriumexposed NOD mice CFSE-labeled BDC2 .5 . 
NOD splenocytes were examined by ﬂow cytometry after transfer into groups of nondiabetic control and previously infected NOD mice for expression of chemokine receptors known to be important for pancreatic inﬁltration . 
Within the PLN , there were no signiﬁcant differences between the two groups in levels of expression of CCR5 , CCR7 , or CXCR3 on either CFSE CD4 cells or endogenous ( CFSE ) CD4 T cells ( Fig. 7 , A -- C , and data not shown ) . 
CCR5 and CCR7 were found to be expressed at much higher levels on T cells within the pancreatic inﬁltrates than on T cells resident in the PLN , underlining the importance of these chemokine receptors for homing to the pancreas and for entry into the inﬁltrates ( data not shown ) . 
To examine potential changes in the pattern of chemokine expression within the tissues of NOD mice after S. typhimurium infection , mRNA was extracted from samples of spleen , PLN , and pancreas harvested from female mice 8 wk after infection and their nondiabetic littermate controls . 
This was used as the template in a series of realtime RT-PCR studies , using primers designed to amplify chemokine gene sequences for a panel of chemokines , and expression of each gene in each tissue normalized to that of the constitutive expressed enzyme HPRT . 
Using this approach , comparison was made in each mouse studied between the normalized expression level of each gene between the different tissues . 
For most chemokines , no consistent differences in expression patterns were found when comparing mice in the noninfected control group with those previously infected with S. typhimurium . 
However , in the case of CXCL10 and CCL21a , comparison of pancreatic to PLN expression showed considerably higher relative pancreatic expression in the case of noninfected mice than in mice previously exposed to infection ( Fig. 7 , D and E ) . 
For CCL21a , this amounted to a complete switch in the direction of the CCL21a gradient , with higher pancreatic than PLN expression in all control mice examined , and higher PLN than pancreatic expression in all previously infected mice studied . 
FIGURE 6 . 
A -- D , Autoreactive T cells show altered patterns of trafﬁcking when transferred into previously infected animals . 
A total of 1 107 CFSE-labeled BDC2 .5 . 
NOD splenocyte cells was transferred into 16-wk-old female NOD mice that had been exposed to S. typhimurium infection 8 wk previously or their nondiabetic , noninfected littermate controls . 
The mice were sacriﬁced 72 h later , and pancreatic inﬁltrating lymphocytes were extracted for ﬂow cytometric analysis . 
A and B , Representative FACS data showing pancreatic lymphocytes analyzed for CD4 and CFSE labeling from control ( A ) and previously infected ( B ) mice . 
C and D , Transferred autoreactive T cells within the pancreas ( C ) and PLN ( D ) were identiﬁed as CFSEint-highCD4 CD3 cells and were expressed as a percentage of all cells found within the forward scatter/side scatter lymphocyte gate . 
Results plotted are for individual mice from one experiment , representative of three separate studies . 
Lines indicate arithmetic means , and p values are by two-sided Mann-Whitney U test . 
FIGURE 7 . 
A -- E , Patterns of chemokine and chemokine receptor expression . 
A total of 1 107 CFSE-labeled BDC2 .5 . 
NOD splenocyte cells was transferred into 16-wk-old female NOD mice that had been exposed to S. typhimurium infection 8 wk previously or their nondiabetic , noninfected littermate controls . 
The mice were sacriﬁced 72 h later , and the expression of chemokine receptors known to be important in the development of pancreatic inﬁltrates was examined on CD3 CD4 CFSE cells from the PLN by ﬂow cytometry . 
A -- C , Expression of CXCR3 ( A ) , CCR5 ( B ) , and CCR7 ( C ) by CD4 CFSEint-high BDC2 .5 . 
NOD cells . 
Results shown are arithmetic means and values for individual mice ( n 6 mice per group ) . 
Two-sided Mann-Whitney U tests were nonsigniﬁcant for all data sets . 
D and E , Spleens , PLN , and pancreata were harvested from 16-wk-old female NOD mice infected with S. typhimurium at 8 wk of age ( n 3 ) , and noninfected nondiabetic littermate controls ( n 3 ) . 
mRNA prepared from these organs was used for quantitative RT-PCR and expression levels of chemokine genes normalized to expression of HPRT . 
Comparison of expression of CCL21a ( D ) and CXCL10 ( E ) in the pancreas relative to PLN of individual mice , denoted C1-3 ( Ctrl , controls ) and S1-3 ( Sal , previously infected mice ) . 
Plots represent fold differences in gene expression between target tissue and reference tissue , as described in Materials and Methods . 
Autoreactive T cell trafﬁcking in CY-treated mice can be modulated by DCs from mice previously infected with S. typhimurium To determine whether the altered trafﬁcking of transferred autoreactive T cells in Salmonella-exposed mice was related to the observed immunomodulatory effects of DCs on T1D , we used a transfer system . 
Forty-eight hours after being given a dose of CY , NOD mice were injected with DCs from mice that had been infected with S. typhimurium 8 wk previously , at a dose established above to protect from diabetes , or with DCs from noninfected littermate control mice . 
Two hours later , splenocytes from a GFP.BDC2 .5 NOD mouse that expresses GFP on all T cells were injected i.v. into the CY/DC-treated mice . 
After a further 72 h , the mice were sacriﬁced , and their PLN and pancreata were examined by ﬂow cytometry for the presence of autoreactive T cells . 
Mice that had received DCs from a previously infected donor consistently showed a signiﬁcant relative excess of GFP CD4 T cells within their PLN and a relative decrease in the same cells in their pancreata , in comparison with the recipients of DCs from control mice ( Fig. 8 ) . 
Of note , in a series of control experiments akin to those shown in Fig. 3 , neither group of DCs was able to stimulate BDC2 .5 . 
NOD CD4 T cells in vitro without the addition of soluble peptide Ag , in the presence of which both sets of DCs were equally effective in terms of T cell activation ( data not shown ) . 
This suggests that DCs taken from prediabetic mice do not bear detectable Ag recognized by BDC2 .5 . 
NOD T cells that might otherwise contribute to an explanation of the observed distribution of transferred cells . 
FIGURE 8 . 
A and B , DCs from S. typhimurium-infected NOD mice inﬂuence trafﬁcking of autoreactive T cells . 
DCs were isolated from the pooled spleens of 18-wk-old female mice infected with S. typhimurium 10 wk previously , or their nondiabetic , noninfected littermate controls . 
A total of 5 105 DCs was transferred into NOD mice given CY 48 h previously . 
7 Two hours later , 1 10 pooled splenocytes from BDC2 .5 GFP donors were given . 
Recipient mice were sacriﬁced after 72 h , and the PLN ( A ) and pancreata ( B ) were removed for FACS analysis . 
Cells that were V 4 GFP CD8 B220 ( representing transferred CD4 T cells ) were expressed as percentages of total lymphocytes within the forward scatter/side scatter lymphocyte gate . 
Results show arithmetic means with values for individual mice plotted . 
Data are from one experiment representative of two repeat studies . 
p values are by two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test . 
Discussion
In this study , we show that Salmonella infection alters DCs such that they are able to inﬂuence autoreactive T cell trafﬁcking to the pancreas and inhibit onset of T1D in the NOD mouse . 
Using a highly aggressive , synchronized model of T1D enabled us to dem-onstrate the protective effects of DCs provided that they are taken from the spleens of NOD mice that have previously been infected with , but subsequently cleared , an attenuated strain of S. typhi-murium . 
DCs taken from the spleens of their noninfected , littermate controls showed no such protective effects . 
There was no evidence in the transferred DC population of either the presence of live Salmonellae , or of the presentation of Salmonella Ags . 
We believe this to be the ﬁrst study to show the ability of DCs that have been exposed in vivo to a physiological stimulus , but not their unexposed counterparts to protect from an autoimmune disease . 
Because the original observations that DCs isolated from PLN , but not spleens , could modulate T1D ( 22 , 23 ) , a number of investigators have used a variety of in vitro manipulations to induce tolerogenic DCs capable of affording protection from different models of autoimmunity . 
These include the use of cultured , bone marrow-derived DCs to prevent T1D ( 14 ) , genetic manipulation of DCs to prevent T1D or collagen-induced arthritis ( 16 , 17 ) , or exposure to immunomodulators including TNF - ( 18 ) or TGF - ( 24 ) to prevent experimental autoimmune encephalitis and experimental autoimmune myasthenia gravis , respectively . 
In particular , exposure ex vivo to IFN - has been shown to generate DCs that ameliorate experimental autoimmune encephalitis ( 25 ) or T1D ( 15 ) . 
Given the sustained high levels of IFN - production we have shown in the spleen , PLN , and pancreas of NOD mice after S. typhimurium infection ( 4 ) , our observations may represent an important in vivo correlate . 
Observations suggest that only a small fraction of labeled DCs can be recovered from major organs 24 h after injection , presumably representing a high level of cell death after transfer ( T. Raine , unpublished observations ) ( 15 ) . 
Overall , it seems that the number of injected DCs that trafﬁc to the PLN is probably very small indeed . 
This not only points to the potency of these effects , but also argues against the possibility that the protective effects we observe might be due to the introduction of large numbers of cells , especially because the effects are speciﬁc to DCs taken from Salmo-nella , but not control mice . 
We sought to further characterize the nature of the effects of CY administration on the DC population in time course studies ( Fig. 4 ) . 
Because the ratio of T cells to DCs does not change after the administration of CY , and because the introduction of DCs from control mice is not protective , this argues against a simple explanation for the protective effects observed involving restorations of perturbations in the T : DC ratio . 
Furthermore , although the time course study revealed an increase in activation status of endogenous DCs after CY administration , we ﬁnd that DCs taken from previously infected mice do not differ in terms of the expression of basic activation markers or cytokine responses to an inﬂammatory stimulus ( Fig. 2 ) . 
Again , this suggests that the protective effect is not due to the introduction of a large number of relatively immature DCs or DCs with a skewed cytokine expression pattern , as may have been the case in previous studies ( 14 , 16 , 17 ) . 
The effects we observed in the CY model led us to compare the Ag presentation occurring in control and previously infected mice . 
We set out to examine the outcome of the transfer in vivo of labeled autoreactive splenocytes from the BDC2 .5 NOD , which are known to be ﬁrst primed with Ag in the PLN , before entering the pancreas ( 21 ) . 
Our previous studies had shown that for at least the ﬁrst 72 h , these cells will proliferate in the PLN , but not the spleen or mesenteric lymph nodes , of both the control and previously infected mice , suggesting that they were being presented with a relevant Ag in this location only ( 4 ) . 
There were no signiﬁcant differences between the proliferative capacities of cells transferred into previously infected mice compared with the noninfected littermate controls ( Fig. 5 and data not shown ) . 
However , a more detailed analysis using multicolor ﬂow cytometry revealed that , in the S. typhimurium-exposed group , a signiﬁcantly larger population of autoreactive T cells retained a naive phenotype ( CD4 CD62LhighCD44intCD25 ) . 
Further analysis revealed that these differences were attributable to expression of CD62L among the CFSEhigh population , suggesting that undivided cells were less prone to cleavage of this cell surface marker in mice previously infected with S. typhimurium . 
These observations are in keeping with previous reports that cell division and changes in surface activation marker expression , including CD62L cleavage , are not coupled events ( 26 ) . 
These observations suggest alterations in autoantigen presentation in the PLN of mice previously infected with S. typhimurium . 
The consequences of such differences are reﬂected in our data showing the failure of autoreactive T cells to enter the pancreatic inﬁltrates of the previously infected mice ( Fig. 6 ) . 
This failure might represent a number of factors , including preferential retention in the PLN , failure to up-regulate relevant chemokine receptors or adhesion molecules , altered patterns of vascular adhesion molecule expression in the pancreata of previously infected mice , or altered patterns of chemokine expression within the inﬁltrates of the previously infected mice . 
Consequently , the ability of transferred T cells to respond to chemokine cues was investigated by ﬂow cytometry using Abs speciﬁc for three key chemokine receptors known to be expressed on T cells and identiﬁed as being of interest based upon reports in the literature . 
Ab blockade of CCR5 prevents development of T1D in NOD mice ( 27 ) , and treatments known to protect from T1D have been associated with down-regulation of CCR5 expression ( 28 ) . 
CXCR3 is the receptor for CXCL10 , which has been implicated in controlling T cell trafﬁcking between the PLN and pancreas ( 29 , 30 ) . 
CCR7 is the common receptor for two key chemo-kines , CCL19 and CCL21 , known to be important for recruitment of T cells and DCs to secondary lymphoid tissue ( 31 , 32 ) . 
In our experiments , higher levels of expression of CCR5 and CCR7 were seen on T cells extracted from pancreatic inﬁltrates than on T cells in the PLN , underlining the relevance of these receptors on inﬁltrating T cells ( data not shown ) . 
However , patterns of chemokine receptor expression were similar among inﬁltrating T cells in control and previously infected mice . 
Furthermore , expression of CCR5 , CCR7 , and CXCR3 on transferred autoreactive T cells in the PLN was not altered between cells introduced into previously infected mice or into their noninfected littermate controls ( Fig. 7 , A -- C ) . 
Because no differences were observed in the expression patterns of the chemokine receptors examined that might account for the differences in autoreactive cell trafﬁcking in noninfected control and S. typhimurium-exposed NOD mice , the expression patterns of chemokines between the organs of the two groups of mice were next investigated . 
In S. typhimurium-exposed mice , the PLN to pancreatic gradient for CCL21a and CXCL10 expression was much less , in the case of CCL21a being reversed so that pancreatic expression levels of between 0.15 and 0.3 of those seen in the PLN were observed ( Fig. 7 , D and E ) . 
Expression of CXCL10 within the pancreas has been linked to the recruitment of lymphocytes into the pancreas by a diabetogenic CD8 T cell clone , while expression within the PLN appears to retain autoreactive T cells and prevent pancreatic inﬁltration ( 30 , 33 ) . 
Raised CXCL10 levels have been demonstrated after infection of mice with a number of pancreas-tropic viruses capable of triggering T1D in a mouse model , while neutralization of CXCL10 prevented T1D in this model ( 34 ) . 
Likewise , CCL21a is able to drive the pancreatic recruitment of lymphocytes ( 35 , 36 ) and is required for islet transplant rejection ( 37 ) . 
CCL21a appears to increase the binding of T cells to vascular endothelium and has been shown in blocking studies to be required for the entry of a diabe-togenic islet-reactive CD8 T cell clone into the pancreas of NOD mice ( 38 ) . 
In the NOD mice protected from TID by exposure to CFA , the expression of CCL21a on the vascular endothelium of the pancreas is reduced ( 39 ) . 
Furthermore , CCL21a expression has been demonstrated on a range of inﬂamed nonlymphoid tissues in a variety of human autoimmune pathologies , including ulcerative colitis ( 40 ) , rheumatoid arthritis ( 40 , 41 ) , primary sclerosing cholangitis ( 42 ) , and inﬁltrative skin pathologies ( 43 ) . 
The receptor for CCL21a is CCR7 , the expression of which was up-regulated on pancreatic inﬁltrating T cells , indicating that CCL21/CCR7 interactions may be of particular importance in the recruitment of BDC2 .5 . 
NOD T cells to the pancreas . 
Taken together , these results suggest a role for decreased expression of T cell attractant che-mokines , including CCL21a and CXCL10 , in the pancreas relative to the PLN in the phenomena observed in this study . 
Importantly , we show in this study that the failure of autoreactive T cells to enter the pancreas of previously infected mice may be replicated in mice given CY simply by the transfer of a small number of DCs from the previously infected mice ( Fig. 8 ) . 
This potent effect immediately suggests a mechanism whereby the same dose of DCs from previously infected mice could prevent the development of T1D in CY-treated recipient mice , as seen in Fig. 1 . 
Because all the CY recipients will have similar patterns of pancreatic inﬁltration before the DC transfer , Salmonella-modulated DCs must play a central role in this system for directing the T cell movements , and , potentially , for excluding autoreactive T cells from the site to which they must trafﬁc to cause autoimmune pa-thology . 
However , our investigations are ongoing both into the comparative distribution of DCs transferred from control and previously infected mice , and into whether these DCs might inﬂuence local patterns of chemokine production either directly or through interaction with other cell types . 
Control of autoreactive T cell trafﬁcking may play an important , but underrecognized role in the prevention of autoimmunity . 
The expression pattern of chemokines has been shown to control autoreactive T cell migration in the initiation and prevention of T1D ( 28 , 30 , 33 ) . 
Prevention of T1D in NOD mice exposed to the NKT cell ligand - galactosylceramide has been linked to alterations in chemokine expression patterns and the preferential retention of transferred autoreactive CD8 T cells in the PLN ( 44 ) . 
Likewise , transferred autoreactive CD4 T cells will accumulate within granulomas outside of the CNS in the protection from experimental autoimmune encephalitis associated with bacillus Calmette-Guerin infection ( 45 ) . 
Furthermore , the importance of cell trafﬁcking in governing autoimmune responses does not appear to be limited to T cells , because the control of migration into lymphoid follicles is an important point of regulation for autoreactive B cells ( 46 ) . 
In this study , we show that changes in auto-reactive T cell trafﬁcking are induced after a prior bacterial infection and may relate to changes in the Ag presentation environment and DC behavior . 
In conclusion , we show in this study that infecS . 
typhimurium tions in the NOD mouse , which we know to halt the development of T1D , induce lasting changes in the DC phenotype of these mice , including the capacity to prevent diabetes in an accelerated model . 
These same DCs will alter the trafﬁcking of autoreactive T cells in this model . 
This is similar to the effects that we observe in intact mice , in which the autoreactive cells are unable to enter the pancreas and show different outcomes on autoantigen-driven proliferation . 
Given the relatively short t of DCs in vivo ( 47 ) and our 1/2 observations of bacterial clearance within 6 wk , it seems unlikely that the DCs we are transferring would have been in contact with any . 
Indeed , we could ﬁnd no evidence for carryover Salmonellae of either live bacteria or bacterial Ags in the DC inoculum . 
Therefore , it seems that the effects of the prior infection must have been to induce long lasting alterations in immune homeostasis within these animals . 
However , the legacy of the infection is not seen solely among DCs , because there are also lasting disturbances among NKT cells ( 4 ) . 
Thus , it seems that a relatively brief exposure to a potent immune stimulus alters a wide variety of immune functions , forcing the immune system to a new set point , which , in the NOD mouse , prevents the subsequent development of T1D . 
It is possible that a similar immune adjustment is diminished in the modern environment , with the rising incidence of autoimmunity apparently mirroring a decreasing incidence of infectious disease ( 1 ) . 
Future studies into what underlies the effects reported in this work , and how they are related to the prevention of T1D by S. typhimurium infection , should yield valuable lessons by which to understand the growing problem of autoimmunity in the developed world . 
Acknowledgments
We are indebted to A. Jessop , N. Miller , and D. Jones for technical assistance , and to Drs. A. O'Garra , N. Holmes , J. Phillips , and B. Stock-inger for critical reading of the manuscript . 
Disclosures 
The authors have no ﬁnancial conﬂict of interest.
References 
1 . 
Cooke , A. , P. Zaccone , T. Raine , J. M. Phillips , and D. W. Dunne . 
2004 . 
Infection and autoimmunity : are we winning the war , only to lose the peace ? 
Trends Parasitol . 
20 : 316 -- 321 . 
2 . 
Christen , U. , and M. G. von Herrath . 
2005 . 
Infections and autoimmunity : good or bad ? 
J. Immunol . 
174 : 7481 -- 7486 . 
3 . 
Bach , J. F. 2002 . 
The effect of infections on susceptibility to autoimmune and allergic diseases . 
N. Engl . 
J. Med . 
347 : 911 -- 920 . 
4 . 
Zaccone , P. , T. Raine , S. Sidobre , M. Kronenberg , P. Mastroeni , and A. Cooke . 
2004 . 
Salmonella typhimurium infection halts development of type 1 diabetes in NOD mice . 
Eur . 
J. Immunol . 
34 : 3246 -- 3256 . 
5 . 
Oldstone , M. B. 1988 . 
Prevention of type I diabetes in nonobese diabetic mice by virus infection . 
Science 239 : 500 -- 502 . 
6 . 
Harada , M. , Y. Kishimoto , and S. Makino . 
1990 . 
Prevention of overt diabetes and insulitis in NOD mice by a single BCG vaccination . 
Diabetes Res . 
Clin . 
Pract . 
8 : 85 -- 89 . 
7 . 
Cooke , A. , P. Tonks , F. M. Jones , H. O'Shea , P. Hutchings , A. J. Fulford , and D. W. Dunne . 
1999 . 
Infection with Schistosoma mansoni prevents insulin dependent diabetes mellitus in non-obese diabetic mice . 
Parasite Immunol . 
21 : 169 -- 176 . 
8 . 
Yrlid , U. , M. Svensson , A. Hakansson , B. J. Chambers , H. G. Ljunggren , and M. J. Wick . 
2001 . 
In vivo activation of dendritic cells and T cells during Sal-monella enterica serovar Typhimurium infection . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
69 : 5726 -- 5735 . 
9 . 
Eriksson , S. , B. J. Chambers , and M. Rhen . 
2003 . 
Nitric oxide produced by murine dendritic cells is cytotoxic for intracellular Salmonella enterica sv . 
Typhimurium . 
Scand . 
J. Immunol . 
58 : 493 -- 502 . 
10 . 
Kirby , A. C. , U. Yrlid , M. Svensson , and M. J. Wick . 
2001 . 
Differential involvement of dendritic cell subsets during acute Salmonella infection . 
J. Immunol . 
166 : 6802 -- 6811 . 
11 . 
Banchereau , J. , and R. M. Steinman . 
1998 . 
Dendritic cells and the control of immunity . 
Nature 392 : 245 -- 252 . 
12 . 
Steinman , R. M. , D. Hawiger , and M. C. Nussenzweig . 
2003 . 
Tolerogenic dendritic cells . 
Annu . 
Rev. Immunol . 
21 : 685 -- 711 . 
13 . 
Harada , M. , and S. Makino . 
1984 . 
Promotion of spontaneous diabetes in non-obese diabetes-prone mice by cyclophosphamide . 
Diabetologia 27 : 604 -- 606 . 
14 . 
Feili-Hariri , M. , X. Dong , S. M. Alber , S. C. Watkins , R. D. Salter , and P. A. Morel . 
1999 . 
Immunotherapy of NOD mice with bone marrow-derived dendritic cells . 
Diabetes 48 : 2300 -- 2308 . 
15 . 
Shinomiya , M. , S. M. Fazle Akbar , H. Shinomiya , and M. Onji . 
1999 . 
Transfer of dendritic cells ( DC ) ex vivo stimulated with interferon - ( IFN - ) down-mod-ulates autoimmune diabetes in non-obese diabetic ( NOD ) mice . 
Clin . 
Exp . 
Immunol . 
117 : 38 -- 43 . 
16 . 
Ma , L. , S. Qian , X. Liang , L. Wang , J. E. Woodward , N. Giannoukakis , P. D. Robbins , S. Bertera , M. Trucco , J. J. Fung , and L. Lu . 
2003 . 
Prevention of diabetes in NOD mice by administration of dendritic cells deﬁcient in nuclear transcription factor - B activity . 
Diabetes 52 : 1976 -- 1985 . 
17 . 
Kim , S. H. , S. Kim , C. H. Evans , S. C. Ghivizzani , T. Oligino , and P. D. Robbins . 
2001 . 
Effective treatment of established murine collagen-induced arthritis by systemic administration of dendritic cells genetically modiﬁed to express IL-4 . 
J. Immunol . 
166 : 3499 -- 3505 . 
18 . 
Menges , M. , S. Rossner , C. Voigtlander , H. Schindler , N. A. Kukutsch , C. Bogdan , K. Erb , G. Schuler , and M. B. Lutz . 
2002 . 
Repetitive injections of dendritic cells matured with tumor necrosis factor induce antigen-speciﬁc protection of mice from autoimmunity . 
J. Exp . 
Med . 
195 : 15 -- 21 . 
19 . 
Livak , K. J. , and T. D. Schmittgen . 
2001 . 
Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2 CT METHOD . 
Methods 25 : 402 -- 408 . 
20 . 
Katz , J. D. , B. Wang , K. Haskins , C. Benoist , and D. Mathis . 
1993 . 
Following a diabetogenic T cell from genesis through pathogenesis . 
Cell 74 : 1089 -- 1100 . 
21 . 
Hoglund , P. , J. Mintern , C. Waltzinger , W. Heath , C. Benoist , and D. Mathis . 
1999 . 
Initiation of autoimmune diabetes by developmentally regulated presentation of islet cell antigens in the pancreatic lymph nodes . 
J. Exp . 
Med . 
189 : 331 -- 339 . 
22 . 
Clare-Salzler , M. J. , J. Brooks , A. Chai , K. Van Herle , and C. Anderson . 
1992 . 
Prevention of diabetes in nonobese diabetic mice by dendritic cell transfer . 
J. Clin . 
Invest . 
90 : 741 -- 748 . 
23 . 
Naumov , Y. N. , K. S. Bahjat , R. Gausling , R. Abraham , M. A. Exley , Y. Koezuka , S. B. Balk , J. L. Strominger , M. Clare-Salzer , and S. B. Wilson . 
2001 . 
Activation of CD1d-restricted T cells protects NOD mice from developing diabetes by regulating dendritic cell subsets . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 98 : 13838 -- 13843 . 
24 . 
Yarilin , D. , R. Duan , Y. M. Huang , and B. G. Xiao . 
2002 . 
Dendritic cells exposed in vitro to TGF - 1 ameliorate experimental autoimmune myasthenia gravis . 
Clin . 
Exp . 
Immunol . 
127 : 214 -- 219 . 
25 . 
Xiao , B. G. , X. C. Wu , J. S. Yang , L. Y. Xu , X. Liu , Y. M. Huang , B. Bjelke , and H. Link . 
2004 . 
Therapeutic potential of IFN - - modiﬁed dendritic cells in acute and chronic experimental allergic encephalomyelitis . 
Int . 
Immunol . 
16 : 13 -- 22 . 
26 . 
Laouar , Y. , and I. N. Crispe . 
2000 . 
Functional ﬂexibility in T cells : independent regulation of CD4 T cell proliferation and effector function in vivo . 
Immunity 13 : 291 -- 301 . 
27 . 
Carvalho-Pinto , C. , M. I. Garcia , L. Gomez , A. Ballesteros , A. Zaballos , J. M. Flores , M. Mellado , J. M. Rodriguez-Frade , D. Balomenos , and A. C. Martinez . 
2004 . 
Leukocyte attraction through the CCR5 receptor controls progress from insulitis to diabetes in non-obese diabetic mice . 
Eur . 
J. Immunol . 
34 : 548 -- 557 . 
28 . 
Cameron , M. J. , G. A. Arreaza , M. Grattan , C. Meagher , S. Sharif , M. D. Burdick , R. M. Strieter , D. N. Cook , and T. L. Delovitch . 
2000 . 
Differential expression of CC chemokines and the CCR5 receptor in the pancreas is associated with progression to type I diabetes . 
J. Immunol . 
165 : 1102 -- 1110 . 
29 . 
Rhode , A. , M. E. Pauza , A. M. Barral , E. Rodrigo , M. B. Oldstone , M. G. von Herrath , and U. Christen . 
2005 . 
Islet-speciﬁc expression of CXCL10 causes spontaneous islet inﬁltration and accelerates diabetes development . 
J. Immunol . 
175 : 3516 -- 3524 . 
30 . 
Christen , U. , D. Benke , T. Wolfe , E. Rodrigo , A. Rhode , A. C. Hughes , M. B. Oldstone , and M. G. von Herrath . 
2004 . 
Cure of prediabetic mice by viral infections involves lymphocyte recruitment along an IP-10 gradient . 
J. Clin . 
Invest . 
113 : 74 -- 84 . 
31 . 
Gunn , M. D. , S. Kyuwa , C. Tam , T. Kakiuchi , A. Matsuzawa , L. T. Williams , and H. Nakano . 
1999 . 
Mice lacking expression of secondary lymphoid organ che-mokine have defects in lymphocyte homing and dendritic cell localization . 
J. Exp . 
Med . 
189 : 451 -- 460 . 
32 . 
Luther , S. A. , H. L. Tang , P. L. Hyman , A. G. Farr , and J. G. Cyster . 
2000 . 
Coexpression of the chemokines ELC and SLC by T zone stromal cells and deletion of the ELC gene in the plt/plt mouse . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 97 : 12694 -- 12699 . 
33 . 
Ejrnaes , M. , N. Videbaek , U. Christen , A. Cooke , B. K. Michelsen , and M. von Herrath . 
2005 . 
Different diabetogenic potential of autoaggressive CD8 clones associated with IFN - - inducible protein 10 ( CXC chemokine ligand 10 ) production but not cytokine expression , cytolytic activity , or homing characteristics . 
J. Immunol . 
174 : 2746 -- 2755 . 
34 . 
Christen , U. , D. B. McGavern , A. D. Luster , M. G. von Herrath , and M. B. Oldstone . 
2003 . 
Among CXCR3 chemokines : IFN - - inducible protein of 10 kDa ( CXC chemokine ligand ( CXCL ) 10 ) but not monokine induced by IFN ¬ 
( CXCL9 ) imprints a pattern for the subsequent development of autoimmune disease . 
J. Immunol . 
171 : 6838 -- 6845 . 
35 . 
Fan , L. , C. R. Reilly , Y. Luo , M. E. Dorf , and D. Lo . 
2000 . 
Cutting edge : ectopic expression of the chemokine TCA4/SLC is sufﬁcient to trigger lymphoid neogenesis . 
J. Immunol . 
164 : 3955 -- 3959 . 
36 . 
Chen , S. C. , G. Vassileva , D. Kinsley , S. Holzmann , D. Manfra , M. T. Wiekowski , N. Romani , and S. A. Lira . 
2002 . 
Ectopic expression of the murine chemokines CCL21a and CCL21b induces the formation of lymph nodelike structures in pancreas , but not skin , of transgenic mice . 
J. Immunol . 
168 : 1001 -- 1008 . 
37 . 
Wang , L. , R. Han , I. Lee , A. S. Hancock , G. Xiong , M. D. Gunn , and W. W. Hancock . 
2005 . 
Permanent survival of fully MHC-mismatched islet allografts by targeting a single chemokine receptor pathway . 
J. Immunol . 
175 : 6311 -- 6318 . 
38 . 
Savinov , A. Y. , F. S. Wong , A. C. Stonebraker , and A. V. Chervonsky . 
2003 . 
Presentation of antigen by endothelial cells and chemoattraction are required for homing of insulin-speciﬁc CD8 T cells . 
J. Exp . 
Med . 
197 : 643 -- 656 . 
39 . 
Qu , P. , R. C. Ji , H. Shimoda , M. Miura , and S. Kato . 
2004 . 
Study on pancreatic lymphatics in nonobese diabetic mouse with prevention of insulitis and diabetes by adjuvant immunotherapy . 
Anat . 
Rec . 
A. Discov . 
Mol . 
Cell Evol . 
Biol . 
281 : 1326 -- 1336 . 
40 . 
Weninger , W. , H. S. Carlsen , M. Goodarzi , F. Moazed , M. A. Crowley , E. S. Baekkevold , L. L. Cavanagh , and U. H. von Andrian . 
2003 . 
Naive T cell recruitment to nonlymphoid tissues : a role for endothelium-expressed CC che-mokine ligand 21 in autoimmune disease and lymphoid neogenesis . 
J. Immunol . 
170 : 4638 -- 4648 . 
41 . 
Page , G. , S. Lebecque , and P. Miossec . 
2002 . 
Anatomic localization of immature and mature dendritic cells in an ectopic lymphoid organ : correlation with selec ¬ 
tive chemokine expression in rheumatoid synovium . 
J. Immunol . 
168 : 5333 -- 5341 . 
42 . 
Grant , A. J. , S. Goddard , J. Ahmed-Choudhury , G. Reynolds , D. G. Jackson , M. Briskin , L. Wu , S. G. Hubscher , and D. H. Adams . 
2002 . 
Hepatic expression of secondary lymphoid chemokine ( CCL21 ) promotes the development of portal-associated lymphoid tissue in chronic inﬂammatory liver disease . 
Am . 
J. Pathol . 
160 : 1445 -- 1455 . 
43 . 
Christopherson , K. W. , II , A. F. Hood , J. B. Travers , H. Ramsey , and R. A. Hromas . 
2003 . 
Endothelial induction of the T-cell chemokine CCL21 in T-cell autoimmune diseases . 
Blood 101 : 801 -- 806 . 
44 . 
Chen , Y. G. , C. M. Choisy-Rossi , T. M. Holl , H. D. Chapman , G. S. Besra , S. A. Porcelli , D. J. Shaffer , D. Roopenian , S. B. Wilson , and D. V. Serreze . 
2005 . 
Activated NKT cells inhibit autoimmune diabetes through tolerogenic recruitment of dendritic cells to pancreatic lymph nodes . 
J. Immunol . 
174 : 1196 -- 1204 . 
45 . 
Sewell , D. L. , E. K. Reinke , D. O. Co , L. H. Hogan , R. B. Fritz , M. Sandor , and Z. Fabry . 
2003 . 
Infection with Mycobacterium bovis BCG diverts trafﬁc of my-elin oligodendroglial glycoprotein autoantigen-speciﬁc T cells away from the central nervous system and ameliorates experimental autoimmune encephalomy-elitis . 
Clin . 
Diagn . 
Lab . 
Immunol . 
10 : 564 -- 572 . 
46 . 
Cyster , J. G. , S. B. Hartley , and C. C. Goodnow . 
1994 . 
Competition for follicular niches excludes self-reactive cells from the recirculating B-cell repertoire . 
Nature 371 : 389 -- 395 . 
47 . 
Kamath , A. T. , J. Pooley , M. A. O'Keeffe , D. Vremec , Y. Zhan , A. M. Lew , A. D'Amico , L. Wu , D. F. Tough , and K. Shortman . 
2000 . 
The development , maturation , and turnover rate of mouse spleen dendritic cell populations . 
J. Immunol . 
165 : 6762 -- 6770 .