H-NS Mediates the Silencing of Laterally
Acquired Genes in Bacteria 
1 1 1 $ 2 2 1 * Sacha Lucchini , Gary Rowley , Martin D. Goldberg , Douglas Hurd , Marcus Harrison , Jay C. D. Hinton 
1 Molecular Microbiology Group , Institute of Food Research , Colney , Norwich , United Kingdom , 2 Oxford Gene Technology , Yarnton , Oxford , United Kingdom 
Histone-like nucleoid structuring protein ( H-NS ) is a modular protein that is associated with the bacterial nucleoid . 
We used chromatin immunoprecipitation to determine the binding sites of H-NS and RNA polymerase on the Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium chromosome . 
We found that H-NS does not bind to actively transcribed genes and does not co-localize with RNA polymerase . 
This shows that H-NS principally silences gene expression by restricting the access of RNA polymerase to the DNA . 
H-NS had previously been shown to preferentially bind to curved DNA in vitro . 
In fact , at the genomic level we discovered that the level of H-NS binding correlates better with the AT-content of DNA . 
This is likely to have evolutionary consequences because we show that H-NS binds to many Salmonella genes acquired by lateral gene transfer , and functions as a gene silencer . 
The removal of H-NS from the cell causes un-controlled expression of several Salmonella pathogenicity islands , and we demonstrate that this has deleterious consequences for bacterial fitness . 
Our discovery of this novel role for H-NS may have implications for the acquisition of foreign genes by enteric bacteria . 
Citation: Lucchini S, Rowley G, Goldberg MD, Hurd D, Harrison M, et al. (2006) H-NS mediates the silencing of laterally acquired genes in bacteria. PLoS Pathog 2(8): e81. DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0020081
Introduction
Bacteria have an extraordinary capacity to adapt to changes in their external environment . 
The histone-like nucleoid-structuring protein ( H-NS ) plays a key role for many Gram-negative bacteria by integrating a complex range of environmental signals such as temperature and osmolarity [ 1,2 ] . 
Consequently , H-NS acts as a pleiotropic regulator of gene expression [ 3 ] . 
Deletion of hns resulted in altered gene expression of almost 5 % of Escherichia coli genes , of which more than 80 % were up-regulated [ 4 ] . 
H-NS also inﬂuences the major DNA transactions , such as replication , transposition and recombination [ 5 ] . 
The modular nature of the H-NS protein is reﬂected by the three distinct domains , involved in DNA binding , dimerisation , and the formation of high order oligomers [ 3,6 ] . 
Unlike classical regulatory repressor and activator proteins , H-NS does not recognise particular sequences of DNA ; however , a number of in vitro studies have shown that the protein has a small preference for curved DNA [ 7 -- 9 ] . 
It has been proposed that after binding to a preferential site , H-NS oligomerizes cooperatively along the DNA to cover a larger region [ 10 -- 12 ] . 
This idea is supported by the observation that mutant H-NS proteins that are unable to oligomerize no longer repress the expression of some promoters [ 10,13 ] . 
Following the binding of H-NS , changes in transcription are likely to be caused by modulations of DNA topology ( i.e. compacting and looping DNA , and the constraint of DNA supercoils [ 14 ] ) . 
As DNA curvature is most pronounced around the transcriptional start of genes [ 15 ] a simple model involving the preferential binding of H-NS to regulatory regions has been considered [ 16 ] , with resultant effects upon global gene expression . 
However , since curved DNA is found near most promoters [ 17 ] , and the majority of bacterial promoters are not regulated by H-NS ( i.e. H-NS-independent ) , it has never been clear how speciﬁcity was achieved . 
The interaction between H-NS and DNA has been studied in vitro by traditional gel retardation and DNA-footprinting experiments , but knowledge of how and where H-NS attaches to DNA in vivo has remained indirect . 
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation on chip ( ChIP-on-chip ) [ 18,19 ] , we have now addressed the question of where H-NS binds to DNA in the macro-molecular context of a living bacterial cell and show how this correlates with the distribution of RNA polymerase on the chromosome . 
Results/Discussion
H-NS and RNA polymerase binding sites on the chromosome of live Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium ( S. typhimurium ) LT2 cells were identiﬁed by ChIP-on-chip , using a tiled oligonucleotide microarray ( Figure 1 , outer circles ) . 
We ﬁrst identiﬁed 495 chromosomal regions that bound RNA polymerase ( RNAP ) during exponential growth in Luria Broth ( LB , Materials and Methods ) , corresponding to 965 genes ( Table S1 ) . 
As expected , the strongest RNAP binding was observed for genes involved in ribosome , ﬂagella and 
Editor : Ralph R. Isberg , Tufts University School of Medicine , United States of America 
Received May 31, 2006; Accepted July 6, 2006; Published August 18, 2006
DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0020081
Copyright : 2006 Lucchini et al. . 
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original author and source are credited . 
Abbreviations : ChIP-on-chip , chromatin immunoprecipitation on microarray ; H-NS , histone-like nucleoid structuring protein ; LB , Luria broth ; LEE , locus of enterocyte effacement ; RNAP , RNA polymerase ; SPI2 , Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 
* To whom correspondence should be addressed . 
E-mail : jay.hinton@bbsrc.ac.uk 
$ Current address : School of Biosciences , University of Birmingham , Edgbaston , Birmingham , United Kingdom 
In recent decades , gene silencing has been well-characterised in plants and animals , and involves the prevention of transcription by DNA-methylation and histone-modification , or interference with translation by small RNA molecules . 
This issue of PLoS Pathogens reports the discovery that global gene silencing also occurs in bacteria . 
The novel mechanism is mediated by the highly abundant histone-like nucleoid structuring protein ( H-NS ) , which blocks the expression of 254 genes in wild-type Salmonella . 
Many of these genes were acquired through horizontal gene transfer , including pathogenicity islands , and these are silenced by the binding of H-NS to AT-rich chromosomal regions . 
The study reveals that H-NS prevents the uncontrolled transcription of genes within pathoge-nicity islands to ensure that bacterial fitness is maintained . 
It is suggested that H-NS plays a role in bacterial evolution by influencing both the acquisition and maintenance of foreign DNA . 
ATP synthesis . 
Consultation of transcriptomic data for LT2 grown to exponential phase [ 2 ] revealed that RNAP-bound genes were expressed at high levels , and RNAP binding was only associated with genes that were transcribed ( Figure 2 ) . 
The ChIP-on-chip experiments using anti-H-NS monoclo-nal antibodies repeatedly displayed high levels of signal across most of the chromosome ( unpublished data ) . 
We conﬁrmed this observation by repeating the experiment with H200 anti-H-NS polyclonal antibodies , and obtained very similar results ( unpublished data ) . 
In contrast , the RNAP ChIP-on-chip showed a much lower background signal . 
These ﬁndings suggest that the low sequence speciﬁcity of H-NS and its high abundance [ 20 ] allows the protein to bind at differing levels throughout most of the chromosome . 
Signiﬁcantly , the background signal was not homogeneously distributed over the genome ; rRNA genes exhibited a low H-NS signal suggesting that H-NS is speciﬁcally excluded from highly transcribed genes ( Figure 3 ) . 
We identiﬁed 422 regions that bound H-NS , corresponding to 746 genes , which we suggest contain high-afﬁnity binding sites ( Table S1 ) , also known as H-NS nucleation sites [ 5 ] . 
To validate the data , we initially focused on the H-NS binding sites for published H-NS-dependent genes , such as proV and leuO . 
ProV is a well characterised H-NS-dependent osmoinducible transport protein in Salmonella [ 21 ] . 
H-NS has been shown to repress proV by binding to a DNA-region , the downstream regulatory element , which is located within the proV structural gene [ 7 ] . 
H-NS also transcriptionally represses leuO , a gene coding for a pleiotropic regulator of gene expression , by binding to a curved AT-rich DNA region upstream of the leuO promoter [ 12 ] . 
Our data conﬁrm the reported binding patterns ( Figure 3 ) . 
To add biological relevance to our ChIP-on-chip data we correlated our results with the transcriptomic analysis of strain LT2 and its congenic hns-deletion mutant JH4000 during late-exponen-tial growth [ 2 ] . 
Genes bound by H-NS are generally expressed at lower than average levels in the wild-type LT2 strain ( Figure 2A ) . 
A large proportion ( 254 or 47 % ) of the 535 genes de-repressed in JH4000 was bound by H-NS in the LT2 strain . 
In contrast , only 20 ( 6.1 % ) of the 330 genes down-regulated in JH4000 were bound by H-NS . 
These ﬁndings demonstrate a role for H-NS as a global gene silencer , and this was conﬁrmed by the observed negative correlation between H-NS binding and gene expression levels ( Figure 2C ) . 
Expression of about half of the genes that bound H-NS in LT2 were not affected by the deletion of hns , probably reﬂecting the absence of positive regulatory proteins in our culture conditions ( exponential growth in LB ) . 
We hypothesise that these 422 binding sites are important for the nucleoid structuring role of H-NS . 
Of the 1,699 genes that were bound by either H-NS or RNAP in wild-type S. typhimurium , only 12 were bound by both proteins . 
This suggests that repression by H-NS is generally achieved by preventing the RNA polymerase from binding to target promoter sequences , probably via alterations at the level of DNA topology . 
An alternate model of H-NS repression involves looping and trapping of RNA polymerase at the promoter [ 22,23 ] . 
This model appears to be contradicted by our data , as we do not observe co-localization of H ¬ 
Synopsis 
Figure 1 . 
H-NS Chip and Transcriptomic Data in Context of the Genome Atlas for the S. typhimurium Chromosome The data from the RNAP and H-NS ChIP-on-chip experiments are shown using coloured concentric circles which are mapped onto the Salmonella chromosome . 
In addition , we show our previously published transcriptome data for the JH4000 hns-deletion mutant [ 2 ] and four DNA structural measures ( http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/GenomeAtlas [ 15 ] ) . 
The order of the concentric circles is indicated in the legend . 
Numbers on the inside of the innermost circle are the location relative to position zero measured in millions of base-pairs ( Mbp ) . 
The origin of replication , predicted terminus region , location of rRNAs and the SPI1 and SPI2 pathogenicity islands are indicated at the edge of the outermost circle . 
DOI : 10.1371 / journal.ppat .0020081 . 
g001 
Figure 2 . 
Correlation between Binding of H-NS , RNAP , and Level of Gene Expression 
( A ) Frequency distribution of relative gene expression levels for S. typhimurium . 
The results are shown for all S. typhimurium genes ( filled circle ) and for genes found to co-localize with H-NS ( filled triangle ) or RNAP ( open circle ) in the ChIP-on-chip experiment . 
Relative gene expression levels for S. typhimurium strain LT2 were taken from Ono et al [ 2 ] . 
( B and C ) Scatter plot correlating binding of RNAP or H-NS to gene expression levels . 
The relative expression level of a gene ( y-axis ) is plotted against the corresponding level of binding to RNAP or H-NS ( x-axis ) as measured in the ChIP-on-chip experiments ( see Materials and Methods ) . 
DOI : 10.1371 / journal.ppat .0020081 . 
g002 
NS with the RNA polymerase . 
However , it remains possible that the trapping of RNA polymerase is too transient to be detected by our experimental approach . 
No consensus DNA sequence has been identiﬁed for H-NS binding , but the protein was reported to have a slightly increased afﬁnity for curved DNA around the regulatory region of genes in vitro [ 7 -- 9 ] . 
We therefore correlated H-NS binding with the base-composition and structural features of DNA such as curvature , stacking energy , and protein-induced deformability . 
For each oligonucleotide on the microarray , we measured the characteristics of the DNA using the data provided by the Genome Atlas of the S. typhimurium chromosome ( http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/GenomeAtlas/ info/background . 
php ) . 
The best observed correlation was between H-NS binding and AT-content ( Figure 4 ) . 
As expected , analysis of H-NS binding in relation to stacking energy and protein deformability gave very similar proﬁles to the base composition ( unpublished data ) , as these structural characteristics are largely dependent on AT-content . 
The correlation between H-NS binding and DNA-curvature was much smaller ( Figure 4 ) . 
Again , we correlated our results with the transcriptomic analysis of strain LT2 and its congenic hnsdeletion mutant JH4000 . 
Base composition was conﬁrmed to play an important role for H-NS as a repressor of gene expression , because AT-rich genes were 20 times more likely to be repressed by H-NS than GC-rich genes . 
In contrast , genes with a strong curved DNA sequence in their regulatory regions were only two times more likely to be repressed by H-NS , compared to genes with low or no curvature . 
Promoter regions are usually associated with both higher AT-content and curvature of DNA . 
However , not all bacterial promoters are regulated by H-NS invoking a requirement for binding speciﬁcity . 
We therefore investigated whether genes bound by H-NS displayed a particular topological or DNA sequence proﬁle around their putative regulatory regions . 
We determined whether the average AT-content and curvature surrounding the translational start for the 746 H-NS-bound genes was different to the proﬁle for all S. typhimurium genes . 
The genes bound by H-NS displayed higher AT-content and curvature throughout the entire length of their regulatory and structural regions ( Figure 4C and 4D ) . 
No particular position in the DNA segment displayed a particular type of topology , relative to the translational start . 
A similar result was obtained for the 254 genes that are both bound by H-NS and de-repressed in JH4000 ( unpublished data ) . 
Our data show no requirement for a particularly AT-rich or curved DNA-segment that acts as an H-NS binding site to be positioned at any particular location relative to the promoter region . 
This corresponds to ﬁndings at the proU and hdeA promoters , showing that the H-NS binding site can be placed at various distances from the transcriptional start without affecting repression by H-NS [ 9,22 ] . 
The results also ﬁt a model where H-NS must bind to regulatory regions at several locations to repress expression . 
As genes acquired by Salmonella through lateral gene transfer are characterised by their high AT-content [ 24 ] , we investigated whether H-NS showed increased afﬁnity for islands of foreign DNA . 
We found a strong preference ( p ,1 3 10 55 ) for H-NS to bind DNA predicted to have recently entered the S. typhimurium genome ; H-NS bound 42 % of genes that have been acquired by lateral gene transfer [ 25 ] . 
Our data show that H-NS binds to DNA regions that extend throughout entire pathogenicity islands ( Figure 3D and 3E ) . 
Previous studies have shown that H-NS represses the expression of virulence genes present on pathogenicity islands and plasmids in various Gram-negative bacteria , including Salmonella , Shigella , E. coli , and Vibrio [ 2,3,26,27 ] . 
Now we have determined that H-NS acts as a selective silencer based on AT-content . 
However , as H-NS does not bind to all AT-rich genes , cellular factors such as other nucleoid associated proteins might modulate H-NS-binding to particular locations on the genome . 
Interestingly , our data do not show preferential binding of H-NS to other mobile elements such as prophages . 
This can be explained by the fact that the four prophages present in the S. typhimurium LT2 genome do not display an AT-content higher than the genome average . 
We hypothesised that the binding of H-NS to Salmonella pathogenicity islands would have biological signiﬁcance if it caused silencing of large regions of horizontally-acquired DNA . 
Therefore , we compared the ﬁtness of a strain unable to express the Salmonella pathogenicity island , SPI2 in both an hns and hnsþ background . 
We discovered that the absence of expression of SPI2 in the strain lacking H-NS substantially improved the growth-rate of Salmonella ( Figure 5 ) . 
The S. typhimurium strain JH4000 displays a severely reduced growth-rate caused by the hns deletion ; the growth rate ( lmax ) of the 
Figure 3 . 
Distribution of H-NS and RNAP over Segments of the S. typhimurium Genome 
( A -- C ) Graphs showing H-NS ( filled circle ) and RNAP binding ( open circle ) over the rrnA locus , proU operon , and leuO gene . 
( D and E ) H-NS and RNA polymerase binding over the Salmonella pathogenicity islands 1 and 2 ( SPI1 , SPI2 ) . 
Genes within SPI1 or SPI2 are represented by black arrows . 
The boundaries of SPI1 and SPI2 were defined from the Horizontal Gene Transfer Database http://www.tinet.org/;debb/HGT [ 25 ] . 
DOI : 10.1371 / journal.ppat .0020081 . 
g003 
Figure 4 . 
Correlation between AT-Content , Curvature and H-NS , and RNAP Binding to DNA 
For each oligonucleotide on the microarrays we calculated its average AT-content ( A ) and curvature ( B ) . 
To minimize bias that might have been introduced by the algorithms used to design the oligonucleotides , flanking sequences ( 50 bp ) of the oligonucleotides were included in the analysis . 
The results of each oligonucleotide were plotted against the level of H-NS binding ( grey circles ) . 
Window-averaged results ( window size : 101 ) are also shown ( solid line ) . 
( C and D ) AT-content and curvature profiles were calculated from putative promoter sequences aligned by over-laying every S. typhimurium gene at the translational start . 
The profiles have been calculated for all the S. typhimurium genes ( black ) , and for those subsets of genes bound by H-NS ( green ) or RNAP ( red ) . 
DOI : 10.1371 / journal.ppat .0020081 . 
g004 
Figure 5 . 
H-NS Confers a Growth Advantage for Wild-Type Salmonella by Silencing Genes Acquired through Lateral Gene Transfer The growth of the five S. typhimurium strains were followed in LB , as described in Materials and Methods . 
The data shown are representative of three experiments , and discussed in the text . 
DOI : 10.1371 / journal.ppat .0020081 . 
g005 
LT2 wild-type strain was 1.45 , twice as fast as the JH4000 hnsdeletion mutant ( lmax 1/4 0.72 ) . 
The ﬁtness defect was partially compensated in strain JH4000DssrA , which is unable to express genes coded within the SPI2 island ; deletion of ssrA from JH4000 caused the growth rate to signiﬁcantly increase ( p ,0.05 ) . 
In contrast , the absence of SPI2 expression in an hnsþ background did not affect growth-rate ( strain LT2ssrA ) . 
It has been reported that a S. typhimurium hns mutation was associated with compensatory mutations in the phoP and rpoS genes [ 28 ] . 
It should be noted that wild-type S. typhimurium strain LT2 already carries a well-characterised point mutation in rpoS which modiﬁes the translation initiation codon , causing decreased translation of RpoS [ 29,30 ] . 
To prove that the effect on growth rate was indeed caused by deletion of the ssrA gene we ruled out the possibility of secondary mutations by complementing JH4000ssrA with plasmid pWSK29ssrAB . 
The plasmid caused a signiﬁcant decrease in growth rate of JH4000 DssrA ( p ,0.05 ) . 
Our data reveal that H-NS offers a ﬁtness advantage to wild-type Salmonella by silencing the expression of foreign DNA under appropriate conditions . 
It appears that some pathogenicity islands have acquired the ability to resist H-NS-mediated silencing ; the locus of enterocyte effacement ( LEE ) pathogenicity island of enteropathogenic E. coli codes for Ler , an H-NS homologue that can displace H-NS from the LEE regulatory regions [ 31 ] . 
In summary , we have discovered that global gene silencing occurs in bacteria , and is mediated by H-NS , which acts on at least 254 S. typhimurium genes . 
Different mechanisms have been proposed to explain the silencing of speciﬁc promoters by H-NS . 
For example , at the ilvIH-leuO-leuABCD gene cluster of S. typhimurium , H-NS is initially thought to bind an AT-rich curved DNA sequence which acts as a nucleation site and subsequently forms an extended nucleoprotein complex [ 12 ] . 
We suggest that this type of nucleoprotein complex is responsible for H-NS-mediated gene silencing , and are investigating the co-operative binding of H-NS at other chromosomal regions in S. typhimurium . 
Our observation that H-NS and RNA polymerase rarely co-localize during exponential growth indicates that H-NS generally prevents gene expression by excluding RNA polymerase from binding to DNA , rather than by trapping RNA polymerase at promoters . 
It is possible that such trapping by H-NS may occur in stationary phase bacteria , when a lower number of RNA polymerase molecules is required for active transcription . 
After this manuscript was submitted , a related study was published by Navarre et al [ 28 ] . 
The authors used an analogous approach to detect H-NS binding sites in S. typhimurium strain 14028 and also concluded that H-NS preferentially binds to AT-rich genes . 
Taken together , these two studies give conﬁdence about the phenomenon of global gene silencing in bacteria ; the H-NS protein was found to bind to AT-rich genes in two different S. typhimurium strains ( 14028 and LT2 ) grown in two distinct media ( minimal medium versus LB ) . 
Taken together , our ﬁndings prove that H-NS has a strong preference for AT-rich DNA which facilitates binding to a large number of genes acquired through lateral gene transfer . 
We know that bacterial evolution relies upon the ability of newly acquired genes to offer a selective advantage to their host [ 32 ] . 
However , the expression of genes encoded by novel DNA must be controlled or the cell will suffer negative consequences . 
We have shown that H-NS is essential for the prevention of decreased ﬁtness associated with uncontrolled expression of pathogenicity island genes . 
The evolutionary implications of this silencing function of a nucleoid -- associated protein merit further study in many enterobacterial pathogens . 
Materials and Methods
Bacterial strains and growth conditions . 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium strain LT2 and its hns derivative JH4000 were described in our recent transcriptomic study [ 2 ] . 
Where necessary , antibiotics were used as appropriate at the following concentrations : ampicillin ( 100 lg/ml ) , chloramphenicol ( 12.5 lg/ml ) . 
To measure growth rates , overnight cultures were subcultured 100-fold into 25 ml fresh LB-broth [ 33 ] and grown in 250-ml ﬂasks in a 37 8C waterbath ( Innova 3100 , New Brunswick Scientiﬁc , Edison , New Jersey , United States ) at 250 rpm . 
Strain construction and DNA manipulation . 
The DssrA deletion derivative of S. typhimurium LT2 ( LT2ssrA ) was generated using the k Red method [ 34 ] . 
The oligonucleotides used for this construction were ssrARedF 59GTGCCAAAGATTTTGCAACAGGCAACT-GGAGGGAAGCATTGTGTAGGCTGGAGCTGCTTC-39 and ssraR-edR 59-ATTCTTTCATTTTGCTGCCCTCGCGAAAATTA AGATAA-TACATATGAATATCCTCCTTAG-39 , in conjunction with template plasmid pKD4 . 
The DssrA deletion mutation was marked with the Kan antibiotic resistance cassette . 
After mutagenesis , the mutation was P22-transduced to a clean background using phage P22 HT105/1 int-201 . 
EBU plates were used to select for non-lysogens [ 35 ] . 
The mutation was veriﬁed by PCR using primers external to the mutation . 
The DhnsDssrA double mutant of S. typhimurium LT2 ( JH4000ssrA ) was obtained by transducing the DssrA mutation into JH4000 . 
Design of a S. typhimurium tiled microarray . 
The microarrays used in this study were designed and produced by Oxford Gene Technology ( Kidlington , Oxfordshire , United Kingdom ) . 
The micro-arrays consisted of 21,340 60-mer oligonucleotides tiled throughout the S. typhimurium LT2 chromosome and does not cover the pSLT plasmid . 
The gap between oligonucleotides averaged 170 bp . 
ChIP-on-chip . 
Cultures of S. typhimurium LT2 were grown in LB broth with aeration ( 37 8C , 250 rpm ) in an Innova 3100 waterbath ( New Brunswick Scientiﬁc ) until OD600 1/4 0.6 ( early-exponential phase ) , at which point formaldehyde was added to a ﬁnal concentration of 1 % ( v/v ) . 
After 20 min incubation at 37 8C , the cross-linking reaction was quenched by adding glycine to a 0.5 M ﬁnal concentration . 
Cells were harvested and washed twice in TBS . 
The cell pellet was then resuspended in 1 ml of lysis buffer ( 10 mM Tris [ pH 8.0 ] , 20 % [ w/v ] sucrose , 50 mM NaCl , 10 mM EDTA [ pH 8.0 ] , 20 mg/ml lysozyme , 0.1 mg/ml RNAseA ) and incubated for 1 h at 37 8C . 
Bead beating ( 3 3 20-s cycles , power 6 [ FastPrep FP120 , Savant , Farmingdale , New York , United States ] ) was used to achieve complete lysis . 
The cell lysate was then added to 4 ml of immunoprecipitation buffer ( 50 mM HEPES-KOH [ pH 7.5 ] , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 1 % [ v/v ] Triton X-100 , 0.1 % [ w/v ] sodium deoxycholate , 0.1 % [ w/v ] SDS , 1 mM PMSF ) . 
Three aliquots ( 800 ll ) were sonicated ( 3 3 20-s cycles at 10 lm amplitude , ( MSE Soniprep 150 , Sanyo Scientiﬁc , Bensenville , Illinois , United States ) to solubilize the chromatin . 
Chromatin immuno-precipitation was then performed as described by Grainger et al [ 18 ] on two aliquots , using monoclonal H113 anti-H-NS antibodies [ 36 ] or anti-RNA polymerase-b subunit monoclonal antibodies ( Neoclone , Madison , Wisconsin , United States ) . 
As a negative control , chromatin immuno-precipitation was done on the third aliquot without the addition of any antibodies . 
Additional control chromatin immuno-precipitations were performed using polyclonal H200 anti-H-NS antibodies [ 36 ] . 
The DNA obtained from chromatin immuno-precipitation was labelled with Cy5 , mixed with a reference ( Cy3-labelled S. typhimurium LT2 genomic DNA ) and hybridized against the S. typhimurium LT2 tiled oligonucleotide microarray . 
The protocol used to label both types of DNA samples is described at http://www.ifr.bbsrc.ac.uk/safety/ microarrays/protocols.html . 
The hybridization procedure is described by Grainger et al [ 37 ] . 
The experiment was performed with three independent biological replicates . 
Data acquisition and analysis . 
The microarray slides were scanned using a GenePix 4000A scanner ( Axon Instruments , Union City , California , United States ) . 
Spot intensities were quantiﬁed using BlueFuse software ( BlueGnome , Cambridge , United Kingdom ) . 
Data analysis and visualization was performed using GeneSpring GX 7.3 ( Agilent , Palo Alto , California , United States ) . 
To compensate for unequal dye incorporation and/or differences in background levels caused by the ChIP procedure , data centering was performed by bringing the median Ln ( Red/Green ) to zero . 
To determine the level of binding of H-NS or RNA polymerase-b subunit ( the enrichment factor ) , results were normalized to the ratios obtained for the negative control ( ChIP-on-chip performed without antibodies ) . 
To identify regions of H-NS and RNAP binding , we only considered oligonucleotides that displayed enrichment factors 1.5 and 2 for RNAP and H-NS data , respectively , in all three biological replicates . 
The enrichment factor cut-off of 2 was chosen to reﬂect the higher variability observed in the H-NS ChIP data . 
We then retained those signals extending to two or more adjacent oligonucleotides on the genome ; the rationale being that since the ChIP procedure generates DNA fragments 500 -- 1,000 bp in length , we did not expect peaks of H-NS and RNAP binding to correspond to isolated oligonucleotides . 
The complete dataset is available as Supporting Information and at the ArrayExpress database ( accession number E-MEXP-806 ) . 
The NCBI ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez ) accession num the LT2 genome sequence is NC003197 . 
ber for 
Acknowledgments 
Supporting Information
References 
1 . 
Tendeng C , Bertin PN ( 2003 ) H-NS in Gram-negative bacteria : A family of multifaceted proteins . 
Trends Microbiol 11 : 511 -- 518 . 
2 . 
Ono S , Goldberg MD , Olsson T , Esposito D , Hinton JCD , et al. ( 2005 ) H-NS is a part of a thermally controlled mechanism for bacterial gene regulation . 
Biochem J 391 : 203 -- 213 . 
3 . 
Dorman CJ ( 2004 ) H-NS : A universal regulator for a dynamic genome . 
Nat Rev Microbiol 2 : 391 -- 400 . 
4 . 
Hommais F , Krin E , Laurent-Winter C , Soutourina O , Malpertuy A , et al. ( 2001 ) Large-scale monitoring of pleiotropic regulation of gene expression by the prokaryotic nucleoid-associated protein , H-NS . 
Mol Microbiol 40 : 20 -- 36 . 
5 . 
Rimsky S ( 2004 ) Structure of the histone-like protein H-NS and its role in regulation and genome superstructure . 
Curr Opin Microbiol 7 : 109 -- 114 . 
6 . 
Esposito D , Petrovic A , Harris R , Ono S , Eccleston JF , et al. ( 2002 ) H-NS oligomerization domain structure reveals the mechanism for high order self-association of the intact protein . 
J Mol Biol 324 : 841 -- 850 . 
7 . 
Owen-Hughes TA , Pavitt GD , Santos DS , Sidebotham JM , Hulton CSJ , et al. ( 1992 ) The chromatin-associated protein H-NS interacts with curved DNA to inﬂuence DNA topology and gene-expression . 
Cell 71 : 255 -- 265 . 
8 . 
Yamada H , Yoshida T , Tanaka K , Sasakawa C , Mizuno T ( 1991 ) Molecular analysis of the Escherichia coli H-NS gene encoding a DNA-binding protein , which preferentially recognizes curved DNA sequences . 
Mol Gen Genet 230 : 332 -- 336 . 
9 . 
Jordi B , Fielder AE , Burns CM , Hinton JCD , Dover N , et al. ( 1997 ) DNA binding is not sufﬁcient for H-NS-mediated repression of proU expression . 
J Biol Chem 272 : 12083 -- 12090 . 
10 . 
Rimsky S , Zuber F , Buckle M , Buc H ( 2001 ) A molecular mechanism for the repression of transcription by the H-NS protein . 
Mol Microbiol 42 : 1311 -- 1323 . 
11 . 
Tupper AE , Owen-Hughes TA , Ussery DW , Santos DS , Ferguson DJP , et al. ( 1994 ) The chromatin-associated protein H-NS alters DNA topology in vitro . 
EMBO J 13 : 258 -- 268 . 
12 . 
Chen CC , Chou MY , Huang CH , Majumder A , Wu HY ( 2005 ) A cisspreading nucleoprotein ﬁlament is responsible for the gene silencing activity found in the promoter relay mechanism . 
J Biol Chem 280 : 5101 -- 5112 . 
13 . 
Badaut C , Williams R , Arluison V , Bouffartigues E , Robert B , et al. ( 2002 ) The degree of oligomerization of the H-NS nucleoid structuring protein is related to speciﬁc binding to DNA . 
J Biol Chem 277 : 41657 -- 41666 . 
14 . 
Dorman CJ , Deighan P ( 2003 ) Regulation of gene expression by histone-like proteins in bacteria . 
Curr Opin Genet Dev 13 : 179 -- 184 . 
15 . 
Pedersen AG , Jensen LJ , Brunak S , Staerfeldt HH , Ussery DW ( 2000 ) A DNA structural atlas for Escherichia coli . 
J Mol Biol 299 : 907 -- 930 . 
16 . 
Jauregui R , Abreu-Goodger C , Moreno-Hagelsieb G , Collado-Vides J , Merino E ( 2003 ) Conservation of DNA curvature signals in regulatory regions of prokaryotic genes . 
Nucleic Acids Res 31 : 6770 -- 6777 . 
17 . 
Perez-Martin J , Rojo F , De Lorenzo V ( 1994 ) Promoters responsive to DNA bending -- A common theme in prokaryotic gene expression . 
Microbiol Rev 58 : 268 -- 290 . 
18 . 
Grainger DC , Overton TW , Reppas N , Wade JT , Tamai E , et al. ( 2004 ) Genomic studies with Escherichia coli MelR protein : Applications of chromatin immunoprecipitation and microarrays . 
J Bacteriol 186 : 6938 -- 6943 . 
19 . 
Ren B , Robert F , Wyrick JJ , Aparicio O , Jennings EG , et al. ( 2000 ) Genome ¬ 
We enjoyed helpful discussions with Steve Busby , Charles Dorman , David Grainger , John Ladbury , Paul Leonard , Ida Porcelli , and members of the Hinton lab . 
We are grateful to Dave Ussery for assistance in making the Genome Atlas which gave a new perspective to our H-NS and RNA polymerase binding data by adding structural factors ; an interactive version of Figure 1 will be available on our publications website ( http://www.ifr.ac.uk/safety/molmicro/pubs.html ) . 
Author contributions . 
SL and JCDH conceived and designed the experiments . 
SL , GR , and MDG performed the experiments . 
SL analyzed the data . 
DH and MH contributed reagents/materials / analysis tools . 
SL and JCDH wrote the paper . 
Funding . 
This work was funded by the BBSRC core strategic grant to JCDH . 
Competing interests . 
The authors have declared that no competing interests exist . 
wide location and function of DNA binding proteins . 
Science 290 : 2306 -- 2309 . 
20 . 
Azam TA , Iwata A , Nishimura A , Ueda S , Ishihama A ( 1999 ) Growth phase-dependent variation in protein composition of the Escherichia coli nucleoid . 
J Bacteriol 181 : 6361 -- 6370 . 
21 . 
Hinton JCD , Santos DS , Seiraﬁ A , Hulton CSJ , Pavitt GD , et al. ( 1992 ) Expression and mutational analysis of the nucleoid-associated protein H-NS of Salmonella Typhimurium . 
Mol Microbiol 6 : 2327 -- 2337 . 
22 . 
Shin M , Song MY , Rhee JH , Hong YJ , Kim YJ , et al. ( 2005 ) DNA loopingmediated repression by histone-like protein H-NS : Speciﬁc requirement of E sigma ( 70 ) as a cofactor for looping . 
Genes Dev 19 : 2388 -- 2398 . 
23 . 
Dame RT , Wyman C , Wurm R , Wagner R , Goosen N ( 2002 ) Structural basis for H-NS-mediated trapping of RNA polymerase in the open initiation complex at the rrnB P1 . 
J Biol Chem 277 : 2146 -- 2150 . 
24 . 
Lawrence JG , Ochman H ( 1997 ) Amelioration of bacterial genomes : Rates of change and exchange . 
J Mol Evolution 44 : 383 -- 397 . 
25 . 
Garcia-Vallve S , Guzman E , Montero MA , Romeu A ( 2003 ) HGT-DB : A database of putative horizontally transferred genes in prokaryotic complete genomes . 
Nucleic Acids Res 31 : 187 -- 189 . 
26 . 
Will WR , Lu J , Frost LS ( 2004 ) The role of H-NS in silencing F transfer gene expression during entry into stationary phase . 
Mol Microbiol 54 : 769 -- 782 . 
27 . 
Coombes BK , Wickham ME , Lowden MJ , Brown NF , Finlay BB ( 2005 ) Negative regulation of Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 is required for contextual control of virulence during typhoid . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 : 17460 -- 17465 . 
28 . 
Navarre WW , Porwollik S , Wang Y , McClelland M , Rosen H , et al. ( 2006 ) Selective silencing of foreign DNA with low GC content by the H-NS protein in Salmonella . 
Science 14 : 236 -- 238 . 
29 . 
Wilmes-Riesenberg MR , Foster JW , Curtiss R 3rd ( 1997 ) An altered rpoS allele contributes to the avirulence of Salmonella typhimurium LT2 . 
Infect Immun 65 : 203 -- 210 . 
30 . 
Lee IS , Lin J , Hall HK , Bearson B , Foster JW ( 1995 ) The stationary-phase sigma factor sigma S ( RpoS ) is required for a sustained acid tolerance response in virulent Salmonella typhimurium . 
Mol Microbiol 17 : 155 -- 167 . 
31 . 
Bustamante VH , Santana FJ , Calva E , Puente JL ( 2001 ) Transcriptional regulation of type III secretion genes in enteropathogenic Escherichia coli : Ler antagonizes H-NS-dependent repression . 
Mol Microbiol 39 : 664 -- 678 . 
32 . 
Lawrence JG ( 2005 ) Common themes in the genome strategies of pathogens . 
Curr Opin Genet Dev 15 : 584 -- 588 . 
33 . 
Sambrook J , Russell DW ( 2001 ) Molecular Cloning : A Laboratory Manual . 
Cold Spring Harbor ( New York ) : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press . 
999 p. 34 . 
Datsenko KA , Wanner BL ( 2000 ) One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in Escherichia coli K-12 using PCR products . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97 : 6640 -- 6645 . 
35 . 
Bochner BR ( 1984 ) Curing bacterial cells of lysogenic viruses by using UCB indicator plates . 
Biotechniques 2 : 234 -- 240 . 
36 . 
Sonnenﬁeld JM , Burns CM , Higgins CF , Hinton JCD ( 2001 ) The nucleoid-associated protein StpA binds curved DNA , has a greater DNA-binding afﬁnity than H-NS and is present in signiﬁcant levels in hns mutants . 
Biochimie 83 : 243 -- 249 . 
37 . 
Grainger DC , Hurd D , Harrison M , Holdstock J , Busby SJW ( 2005 ) Studies of the distribution of Escherichia coli cAMP-receptor protein and RNA polymerase along the E. coli chromosome . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 : 17693 -- 17698 .