BMC Microbiology
Abstract 
Background : Salmonella enteritidis is suggested to translocate in the small intestine . 
In vivo it induces gene expression changes in the ileal mucosa and Peyer 's patches . 
Stimulation of Salmonella translocation by dietary prebiotics fermented in colon suggests involvement of the colon as well . 
However , effects of Salmonella on colonic gene expression in vivo are largely unknown . 
We aimed to characterize time dependent Salmonella-induced changes of colonic mucosal gene expression in rats using whole genome microarrays . 
For this , rats were orally infected with Salmonella enteritidis to mimic a foodborne infection and colonic gene expression was determined at days 1 , 3 and 6 post-infection ( n = 8 rats per time-point ) . 
As fructo-oligosaccharides ( FOS ) affect colonic physiology , we analyzed colonic mucosal gene expression of FOS-fed versus cellulose-fed rats infected with Salmonella in a separate experiment . 
Colonic mucosal samples were isolated at day 2 post-infection . 
Results : Salmonella affected transport ( e.g. Chloride channel calcium activated 6 , H + / K + transporting Atp-ase ) , antimicrobial defense ( e.g. Lipopolysaccharide binding protein , Defensin 5 and phospholipase A2 ) , inflammation ( e.g. calprotectin ) , oxidative stress related genes ( e.g. Dual oxidase 2 and Glutathione peroxidase 2 ) and Proteolysis ( e.g. Ubiquitin D and Proteosome subunit beta type 9 ) . 
Furthermore , Salmonella translocation increased serum IFNγ and many interferonrelated genes in colonic mucosa . 
The gene most strongly induced by Salmonella infection was Pancreatitis Associated Protein ( Pap ) , showing > 100-fold induction at day 6 after oral infection . 
Results were confirmed by Q-PCR in individual rats . 
Stimulation of Salmonella translocation by dietary FOS was accompanied by enhancement of the Salmonella-induced mucosal processes , not by induction of other processes . 
Conclusion : We conclude that the colon is a target tissue for Salmonella , considering the abundant changes in mucosal gene expression . 
Background
Foodborne infections cause a major burden on public health services and represent significant costs in many countries . 
Salmonella infection is one of the most common and widely distributed foodborne diseases and can be severe in the young , the elderly and patients with weakened immunity . 
Salmonella enteritidis is the most frequently isolated serotype , causing gastroenteritis in most humans and systemic infection in a subpopulation [ 1,2 ] . 
The precise mechanisms of Salmonella-host interaction in vivo at early time points after infection are not well known . 
Insight in pathogen-induced host processes in vivo could help to design therapeutic or nutritional strategies for infection prevention . 
An approach to investigate the effects of a pathogen on host target cells is the use of microarrays that contain the whole genome of the host . 
This broad approach can reveal biological processes affected by the pathogen . 
The rat is a good model to study Salmonella enteritidis-induced host processes , since salmo-nellosis in the rat shares many features of human disease [ 3 ] . 
Besides gastroenteritis , a self-limiting systemic infection is observed in rats . 
The ileum is thought to be the main site of Salmonella invasion in both humans and rats [ 4 ] . 
For this reason we have previously studied Salmonella-induced gene expression in the ileum of rats . 
This study showed that Salmonella affects only a small number of genes at early time points post-infection [ 5 ] . 
Carbohydrate transport , antimicrobial defense and detoxification were the main affected biological processes . 
At later time points large numbers of inflammation genes were found to be up-regulated in the ileal mucosa . 
The colon mucosa is supposed to be protected from Salmonella colonization by the abundant intestinal microflora . 
Pathogens entering the colon have to compete for nutrients and binding places with the endogenous flora . 
However , biopsies taken from humans during an infection with nontyphoid Salmonella setorypes suggest that the colon is involved in Salmonella infections [ 6-8 ] . 
As most studies focus on the ileum , which is thought to be the most likely site of trans-location , only little information is available on Salmonella translocation in the large intestine [ 9 ] . 
Besides indications from studies on biopsies , we have another reason to suspect colonic involvement in Salmonella infection pathology . 
We have shown earlier that diets supplemented with prebiotics such as fructo-oligosaccharides ( FOS ) , lactulose and inulin consistently increased intestinal Salmonella translocation in rats [ 10-13 ] . 
As fermentation of FOS , and other prebiotics , occurs in cecum and colon and is very limited in the ileum of humans [ 14 ] and rats [ 15 ] , it is unlikely that prebiotics facilitated translocation of Salmo-nella at that particular site . 
This is supported by the absence of ileal inflammation in FOS-fed and Salmonella-infected rats in contrast to profound cecal and colonic inflammation [ 11 ] . 
To extend the current limited evidence indicating colonic involvement in Salmonella infection , we used transcriptional profiling to investigate genes and biological processes in the rat colonic mucosa affected by Salmonella . 
We first studied colonic mucosal gene expression responses at days 1 , 3 and 6 after oral Sal-monella infection of rats using whole genome microarrays and Q-PCR . 
In a second infection experiment , we studied whether the increased translocation of Salmonella by die-tary FOS was reflected by amplification of Salmonella-induced gene expression changes in the colon . 
Results Time course infection study
General infection characteristics In agreement with previous studies , food consumption and growth of the Wistar rats were not affected by Salmo-nella infection [ 16 ] . 
Salmonella translocation to mesenteric lymph nodes was observed at days 1 , 3 and 6 ( table 1 ) . 
This implies that at day 1 , Salmonella has already crossed the intestinal barrier . 
In agreement with previous studies [ 16,17 ] , Salmonella was detected in the spleen at days 3 and 6 and in the liver at day 6 ( table 1 ) . 
Urinary NOx excretion , a parameter of systemic infection , was found to be increased from day 3 onwards ( figure 1a ) . 
Salmonella-induced processes in colon mucosa
To identify Salmonella-regulated processes , microarraybased gene expression profiling of colonic mucosa at days 1 , 3 and 6 days p.i. was performed . 
The arrays contained 44000 spots of which 32783 spots exceeded > 2 times the 
Fienc - i f i , i s t i t i inSnuofgmuitronoeenu1crtsietnudadr ( y ❍ ( n ) At ) irnafteectaendd ( n ■ t ) rigtreo ( uNpOox ) f ehxecrtemioenconurthse Sum of urinary nitrate and nitrite ( NOx ) excretion in the non-infected ( ❍ ) , infected ( ■ ) groups of the time course infection study ( A ) . 
And the urinary NOx excretion in the cellulose infected ( ■ ) and in the fructo-oligosaccharide ( FOS ) infected ( ▲ ) groups in the dietary infection study ( B ) . 
Infected rats were orally challenged with S. enteritidis on day 0 . 
Results are expressed as mean ± SEM ( n = 8 in the time course infection study and n = 6 in the dietary infection study ) . 
* p < 0.05 . 
background value and were included in the analysis . 
Sal-monella changed the expression of 330 genes > 2-fold at least at one of the three time points studied . 
At days 1 and 3 p.i. comparable numbers of genes ( 70 and 57 genes , respectively ) were affected by Salmonella infection in comparison with non-infected rats , while at day 6 approximately four times more genes were affected ( figure 2 ) . 
This corresponded with progression of the infection as observed by the organ cultures and urinary NOx excretion as mentioned above . 
At all time points studied , most genes showed increased expression upon Salmonella infection , whereas only a small percentage of total regulated genes were down-regulated ( 10 % at day 1 , 27 % at day 3 , 5 % at day 6 figure 2 ) . 
The genes that changed more than 2-fold at any time point ( FC > 2 infected/non-infected ) were classified into biological processes according to gene ontology terminology [ 18,19 ] . 
Not all genes are annotated to GO processes . 
Forty percent of the genes on the array were annotated to GO processes . 
Therefore we manually supplemented the significant processes ( p < 0.001 ) with the remaining significant genes using biological databases and scientific literature . 
To prevent the occurrence of false positive genes , and over-interpretation of 
FT ft og f ff ii l n p l f o , c6hihagaenuengrreum2rbeaelartineofretcdhtiiaonenr2ewnntihacloSylaolemxomnruecslaosesodarogceonrnaetsrsowaltitdrheaaytsfm1ledn3tor The number of differentially expressed genes with a fold change greater than 2 in colon mucosa of rats at days 1 , 3 or 6 after oral infection with Salmonella or control treatment . 
biological processes affected by Salmonella , we focused on biological processes with at least three genes exceeding the cut-off FC > 2.0 . 
Additionally , we observed that the genes within one biological process showed comparable patterns of expression ( table 2 ) , which strongly indicates that these processes are truly affected by Salmonella . 
We focused on the early Salmonella-induced gene expression changes occurring at days 1 and 3 p.i. Presumably , these early modulated genes are more related to Salmo-nella-induced primary changes than gene expression at day 6 which is a secondary result of Salmonella-induced inflammation . 
Genes affected > 2-fold on day 1 and/or day 3 p.i. that could be related to a biological process are shown in table 2 . 
The biological processes that contained 3 or more modulated genes were transport , oxidative stress , immune response , antimicrobial defense , inflammatory response , interferon pathways and proteolysis . 
For more insight into these processes , genes that changed > 2-fold at day 6 p.i. and also showing a > 1.5-fold induction at day 1 or 3 p.i. were also added to this table . 
Genes that changed > 2-fold on day 6 p.i. only are shown in Additional File 1 . 
The gene most affected by Salmonella infection in the colon was pancreatitis associated protein ( Pap ) , showing 11 , 45 and 114 fold induction at days 1 , 3 and 6 respectively . 
Seventy genes changed > 2-fold at day 1 p.i. , of these genes 7 encoded for transporters and 5 genes encoded for immune response proteins ( table 2 ) . 
At day 3 p.i. , 57 genes showed FC > 2 , again including genes encoding for immune response proteins . 
Induced expression of Interleukin 1β and 1α indicates activation of an inflammatory response . 
Induction of dual oxidase 2 and glutathione peroxidase 2 suggest oxidative stress in the colonic mucosa . 
At day 6 more than 200 genes were induced more than 2-fold in infected mucosa compared with non-infected mucosa ( Additional File 1 ) . 
Most of these genes were related to immune and inflammatory responses . 
Processes related to inflammation-induced damage and repair , such as connective tissue remodeling and chemo-attraction also showed clear induction at day 6 p.i. To exclude the possibility that the observed changes were due to cellular changes of the mucosa , we analyzed expression differences of cell-type specific genes [ 20,21 ] ( Additional File 2 ) . 
As transporters are most likely expressed by enterocytes [ 22 ] , we examined expression of enterocyte specific genes ( Fabp2 , Vil2 , Alpi2 ) . 
These genes showed diverse regulation , indicating that the increased expression of transporters at day 1 is not due to altered enterocyte composition in the mucosal samples . 
A similar observation was found for Goblet cell specific genes ( Muc2 , Muc3 , Tff1 , Tff3 ) and Paneth cell specific genes ( RD-5 and Pla2g2a ) . 
Expression of leukocyte specific genes was not altered at early timepoint , a mild increase was observed at day 6 p.i. Together this indicated that the observed Salmonella induced gene expression changes did not result from changes in cellular composition of the mucosa . 
This is in agreement with histology results from earlier Salmonella infection experiments , showing no or only minor deviations in intestinal mucosal architecture from healthy control slides ( data not shown ) . 
This is further supported by the relatively constant expression of a group of well known housekeeping genes ( Additional File 2 ) . 
The largest group of related genes induced by Salmo-nella infection in colon mucosa is related to interferon pathways as more than 20 IFNγ-regulated genes showed increased expression at at least one time point studied . 
The IFNγ-induced gene expression was most prominent at day 6 p.i , but already from day 1 onwards induction of several IFNγ-inducible GTPases ( Gbp1 , Gbp2 , Ifi47 , Ifit2 ) was seen ( table 2 ) . 
Furthermore at day 3 p.i. ( table 2 ) induction of two members of the IFNγ-signaling pathway ( Stat1 and Irf7 ) was observed . 
Despite induction of many interferon-related genes , increased expression of IFNγ mRNA itself could not be detected ( changed 1.1-fold at days 1 and 3 , and 1.3-fold at day 6 p.i. ) . 
IFNγ protein concentrations were measured in individual serum samples . 
IFNγ was not detected in serum of non-infected rats ( all timepoints ) and at the first day after Salmonella administration to rats . 
However , from day 3 p.i. serum IFNγ increased ( figure 3 ) . 
The serum IFNγ most probably originated from peripheral immune activation , as the increase in serum IFNγ followed the same trend as the increase in Salmonella CFU 's in peripheral organs ( table 1 ) . 
In the time course infection study , the kinetics of urinary NOx excretion are reflected by Nos2 gene expression in colonic mucosal with a small 1.6-fold induction at day 3 p.i. and a 4 fold induction at day 6 p.i. ( table 2 ) . 
Q-PCR confirmation of Salmonella-induced gene-expression To determine inter-individual variation in gene expression within treatment groups , RNA from the colon of individual animals was analyzed by Q-PCR . 
We chose individual confirmation of Stat1 and Ifi47 to gain insight in inter individual interferon response as we also focused on the individual protein levels of IFNγ . 
Confirmation of PAP was chosen to obtain insight in the individual kinetics of the most strongly induced gene in colon mucosa at all time points . 
Q-PCR analysis showed rather large inter-individual variation among the outbred rats . 
Pap expression levels in the non-infected colonic mucosa were near detection level , which made it difficult to determine precise fold changes . 
Nevertheless , the Q-PCR analysis of the three genes examined clearly confirmed the gene expression changes observed in the microarray analysis ( figure 4 ) . 
To further validate the array data of the time course infection study we compared the gene expression changes of day 1 and 3 p.i. with gene expression data obtained from the independent dietary infection study at day 2 p.i. ( table 2 ) . 
Similar biological processes were induced at early timepoints in both studies . 
At individual gene expression level several transporter genes ( Cacna1i , Slc4a1 , Slc15a1 ) and immune response genes ( Igsf4d , Ilf1 , Csf2 ) showed no overlap possibly due to infection kinetics . 
However gene expression results of day 3 and day 2 p.i. largely overlapped ( table 2 ) . 
Dietary infection study General infection characteristics
Food consumption and growth of the Wistar rats on both cellulose and FOS diet were similar , before and after infection . 
The section was performed on day 2 p.i. because similar effects on gene expression at days 1 and 3 were observed in the time course infection study . 
Furthermore we were interested in the primary responses as we expect that diet will mainly influence early events such as attachment to the mucosa and translocation of the pathogen . 
These events occur for the most part luminal where direct interaction between dietary components , pathogens and mucosa take place , while later phases merely reflect secondary infection and inflammation responses . 
At day 3 p.i. the serum IFNγ concentration and the amount of translocated Salmonella in the spleen are already high , which indicates systemic infection . 
At day 1 p.i. no serum IFNγ or Salmonella translocation to the spleen was observed . 
We chose day 2 p.i. as this seems the appropriate time point to study the effects of FOS on early Salmo-nella-induced changes . 
Salmonella colonization was quantified by determination of colony-forming units ( CFU/g ) in fresh fecal samples with time . 
At day 1 Salmo-nella levels were not significantly different between cellulose and FOS-fed animals ( 7.23 ± 0.11 and 7.10 ± 0.22 , respectively ) . 
At day 2 FOS-fed rats had more Salmonella in feces than their cellulose counterparts ( 7.25 ± 0.25 and 
. 
iigr ) umeIF3Nγ levels before and after infection ( days 1 , 3 and 6 Serum IFNγ levels before and after infection ( days 1 , 3 and 6 p.i. ) . 
Each dot represents an individual rat . 
Group medians are presented by a black line . 
* p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.001 . 
F t cii s iff i i a l iInifdgeihuvetrdoecunoa4loernxcpmoreunsctsroiolantarotefadttwmoeernentntetrtfiemreonp-orenlatsteadftgeernSeaslmnodnePlaap Individual expression of two interferon-related genes and Pap in the colon mucosa at different time points after Salmonella infection or control treatment . 
Genes expression is quantified by Q-PCR , using Rps26 as reference gene ( using Arf1 as reference gene showed similar results ; data not shown ) . 
Each dot represents an individual rat . 
Dotted line indicate lowest mRNA standard . 
Medians are presented by a black line . 
The median value of the uninfected group was set at 1.0 . 
Y-axis is at log10 scale . 
* p < 0.05 , ** p < 0.01 , *** p < 0.001 . 
6.53 ± 0.25 , respectively ; p < 0.05 ) . 
Salmonella translocation to mesenteric lymph nodes and spleen was not significantly different in the FOS group compared to the cellulose group when quantified by CFU . 
Viable Salmo-nella counts in MLN were 5.96 ± 0.08 in the cellulose group and 6.19 ± 0.10 log10 CFU/g in the FOS group . 
Numbers in spleen were 2.85 ± 0.14 ( cellulose ) and 2.98 ± 0.16 log10 CFU/g ( FOS ) . 
Counts in liver were under the detection limit of 102 CFU/g tissue in the cellulose and FOS group . 
These numbers are comparable to those observed in the time course infection study at day 3 and highly similar to numbers observed in earlier studies which showed increased translocation in FOS-fed rats at later time points after infection [ 23 ] . 
To observe long term effects of FOS on Salmonella translocation in this study , urinary NOx excretion with time was determined in additional groups of rats . 
Urinary NOx excretion of FOS-fed rats increased to 132 µmol / d at day 6 p.i. and started to decline towards baseline levels thereafter ( figure 1B ) . 
Peak urinary NOx excretion of infected rats fed the cellulose diet was just one third of the level reached by the infected rats fed the FOS diet , i.e. 41 µmol / day ( figure 1B ) . 
The NOx values for the cellulose diet are similar to those obtained in the time course infection study ( figure 1A ) . 
The kinetics of urinary NOx excretion were similar in both diet groups , but total infection-induced urinary NOx excretion was higher in the FOS group indicating enhanced Salmonella translocation . 
Effect of dietary FOS on Salmonella-induced mucosal genes in colon mucosa The rats of the time course infection study and the rats in the dietary infection study on cellulose diet showed a comparable urinary NOx excretion and thus Salmonella translocation response . 
Despite the fact that the two studies were separately performed and different time points were studied , the identified biological processes affected by Salmonella at day two p.i. were comparable to processes observed at days 1 and 3 p.i. Furthermore both studies showed that more genes were up-regulated than downregulated by Salmonella . 
For detailed analysis , we focused on the most robust genes , i.e. genes that showed similar Salmonella induced regulation in the two independent studies . 
We choose a threshold of FC < 1.5 for both studies , which is less stringent than the threshold we choose for analysis within one study ( FC < 2.0 ) . 
We feel that this is legitimate , as genes with small but similar regulation in two completely independent studies are less likely to be selected by chance . 
Thirty-one genes fulfilled this criterion , 26 were up-regulated and 5 down-regulated . 
Eight-een of the up-regulated genes were categorized to the same processes found to be modulated by Salmonella in the colonic mucosa in the time course infection study , i.e. the transporter Clca6 , the oxidative stress genes Gpx2 and Duox2 , the immune response genes Il1b and T2bp , the antimicrobial defense gene Pla2g2a the inflammatory response genes Pap , Tgm2 and Reg3g , the interferon related genes Ifi47 , Gbp2 , Iigp2 , P47Iigp , Stat1 , G1p2 and the proteasome related genes Psmb9 , Prss22 , Psmb10 , Ubd ( Table 2 ) . 
The other 8 up-regulated genes which could not be grouped to a specific process were Palmitoyl-protein thioesterase , Schlafen 3 ( Slfn3 ) , Tripartite motif protein 15 ( Trim15 ) , Aquaporin 3 ( Aqp3 ) and four unknown genes . 
The 5 down-regulated genes were Heat shock protein 70 kD 1A ( Hspa1a ) , Resistin like alpha ( Retnla ) , Resis-tin like gamma ( Retnlg ) , Collectin sub-family member 10 ( Colec 10 ) and Mammalian suppressor of Sec4 ( Mss4 ) . 
Not all processes that were identified in the time course infection study at both days 1 and 3 p.i. were confirmed in the dietary infection study at day 2 p.i. ( table 2 ) . 
This was the case for two processes , namely transport ( Cacna1i , Slc4a1 , Atp12a , Slc15a1 ) and immune response ( Igsf4d , RT1 , Ilf1 , Csf2 , Il1a ) . 
Furthermore the antimicrobial defense gene Lbp and two interferon pathway genes ( Gbp1 , Ifit2 ) were not confirmed . 
To examine whether our choice for FC > 1.5 was legitimate , we studied whether application of threshold FC > 1.3 and FC > 1.7 resulted in identification of the same processes as identified with FC > 1.5 . 
The general picture of processes affected was the same for FC > 1.5 and FC > 1.7 . 
However , with FC > 1.3 more genes could be included in processes identified with FC > 1.5 , such as the interferon response and proteolysis ( data not shown ) . 
However , many other genes could not be grouped into ( new ) specific biological processes , indicating that a cut-off FC > 1.3 might be too flexible and results in introduction of false positive processes , probably not related to the treatment . 
Therefore , we choose FC > 1.5 for further analysis . 
To investigate the effects of FOS on Salmonella infection in the colon , we studied the expression of Salmonella-induced colonic mucosal genes in infected rats fed the cellulose diet versus infected rats fed the FOS supplemented diet . 
The five genes that were consistently downregulated by Salmonella in both studies ( Hspa1a , Retnla , Retnlg , Colec 10 and Mss4 ) were not further influenced by FOS ( equal gene expression in cellulose - and FOS-fed infected rats ) . 
For initiating early mucosal events after Salmonella infection ( e.g. chemo attraction of inflammatory cells ) increases in epithelial gene expression may be more important than decreases [ 24,25 ] . 
We focused on the 26 genes which showed a consistent increase in gene expression after Salmonella infection of FC > 1.5 in both studies . 
All 26 genes consistently induced by Salmonella infection in the colon mucosa showed a further up-regulation in colon mucosa of Salmonella infected rats fed FOS ( figure 5 ) . 
The effect of FOS on the cluster of Salmonella affected genes was statistically significant . 
To asses the inter-indi-vidual gene expression in the dietary infection study we selected genes from several Salmonella modulated process 
EFi l r s t l e a t coxgpounersemi5uocnolseaveolforfamsofestdcaoncesilsluteonsteSdalimtoonerlla-FtOrSgedtiegenes in Expression level of most consistent Salmonella-target genes in colon mucosa of rats fed a cellulose diet or a FOS diet . 
The gene expression is obtained from micro array analysis of pooled colonic mucosa samples collected at day 2 post-infec-tion . 
Each dot represents a gene . 
The median value of each gene in the uninfected group is set to 1.0 . 
Y-axis is at log2scale . 
*** p < 0.001 . 
for individual Q-PCR confirmation : Clca6 , Gpx2 , Il1b , Pla2g2a , Pap , Tgm2 , Stat1 , Gbp2 and Ifi47 . 
Q-PCR of the selected genes in individual samples showed high inter-individual variation but confirmed the fold changes of the microarray study using pooled samples ( table 3 ) . 
The confirmed Salmonella induced gene expression changes were significant ( p < 0.05 ) for 7 of the 9 genes , except for Tgm2 ( p = 0.09 ) and Stat1 ( p = 0.08 ) . 
Examination of FOS-fed versus cellulose-fed infected groups on individual gene level showed a significant increase of Clca6 and Pla2g2a . 
Expression of Gpx2 , Il1β and Tgm2 was > 1.5-fold increased by FOS feeding in comparison to cellulose feeding but this was not statistically significant . 
The genes Pap , Stat1 , Ifi47 and Gbp2 showed non-significant and small increases of 1.1 -- 1.4 fold . 
In t-testing each gene is tested independently , the FOS vs cellulose effect was not statistically significant for each independent gene . 
However , FOS significantly increased expression of the cluster of the 26 Salmonella induced genes ( see figure 5 and Additional File 3 ) . 
We also looked at overall gene expression differences between cellulose - and FOS-fed rats at day 2 after Salmonella infection ( Additional File 3 ) . 
This was done to determine whether the stimulated translocation in FOS-fed rats resulted in additionally affected genes or biological processes not induced by Salmonella in the cellulose groups . 
Twenty genes were induced by Salmonella > 2-fold in cellulose-fed infected rats . 
In the FOS-fed infected rats 72 genes were induced by Salmonella > 2-fold . 
Seventeen genes overlapped between these two diet groups . 
Detailed analysis of the genes exclusively induced ( > 2-fold ) in the FOS-fed group showed that those could be categorized in the same processes identified earlier ( table 2 and Additional File 3 ) . 
Obviously , the induced translocation of Sal-monella by FOS supplementation did not affect other processes than those already identified in Salmonella infected rats on a cellulose diet . 
However , more genes of the same processes and higher fold-changes were noticed in the colonic mucosa of infected rats on the FOS diet . 
Nos2 gene expression in colonic mucosa was below detection levels in the dietary infection study . 
As significant differences in NOx excretion between infected cellulose - and FOS-fed rats were observed from day 5 , no differences at Nos2 gene expression were expected at day 2 p.i. Serum IFNγ was not detected at day 2 p.i. , neither in infected cel-lulose-fed rats nor in infected FOS-fed rats . 
Discussion Colon is an infection target
This study shows quick and profound gene expression changes in the rat colon mucosa upon oral S. enteritidis infection , which implicates that not only the ileum , but also the colon , is a target for Salmonella infection . 
The earliest responses were noticed on mucosal transport and antimicrobial defense . 
The most responsive gene is Pap , which showed an 11-fold induction in colon mucosa on the first day after infection and increased to over 100 fold at day 6 . 
At later timepoints , the most notable process affected is interferon-related . 
Colonic genes consistently induced by Salmonella infection in two independent studies , were all further enhanced by FOS supplementation , a known stimulus of colonic bacterial fermentation . 
Salmo-nella , ingested with contaminated foods or drinks , is thought to colonize the distal small intestine and to trans-locate through ileal Peyer 's patches to extra-intestinal organs [ 4,26 ] . 
Several observations suggest that other parts of the intestine are also involved in Salmonella infection . 
High numbers of Salmonella are found in the cecum and colon of orally infected rats [ 4,26 ] as well as pigs [ 27 ] . 
In humans Salmonella commonly affects the small intestine , but colonic involvement of S. enteritidis has been reported in humans [ 6,7,28 ] and may play an important role in induction of diarrhea [ 6 ] . 
Studies describing mucosal invasion via the paracellular and transcellular route [ 29,30 ] also suggest that translocation of Salmonella species to the systemic circulation is not restricted to the ileal Peyer 's patches . 
Our studies on the effects of prebiot-ics on resistance of the host to Salmonella infection also point to the colon as invasion site [ 11 ] . 
Together results from literature and those presented here indicate that the colon is one of the targets for Salmonella infection . 
Interferon-gamma response
The increase of many IFNγ-regulated genes in the Salmo-nella-infected colon in the present in vivo study actually confirms the earlier suggested role of IFNγ in relation to host defense against Salmonella . 
Serum IFNγ levels increase in mice infected with Salmonella by oral or intra-peritoneal route [ 31-34 ] . 
IFNγ is produced by natural killer cells , CD4 Th1 cells and CD8 cytotoxic lymphocytes [ 35-37 ] . 
IFNγ most likely exerts its function in host defense by activation of macrophages which can kill Sal-monella [ 38 ] . 
In our Salmonella time course infection study , more than 20 IFNγ-related genes were up-regulated ( table 2 ) . 
This did not coincide with an increased IFNγ mRNA level at any of the time points studied . 
In addition , we could not detect IFNγ protein in Salmonella-infected colons ( data not shown ) . 
Serum levels of this pro-inflam-matory cytokine were undetectable at day 1 p.i. but rose steadily from day 3 p.i. with large inter-individual variation in the magnitude of response ( figure 3 ) . 
Despite the lack of detectable IFNγ protein in colonic mucosa and in serum at day 1 , we did observe increased expression of genes in the INFγ induced pathway at that timepoint . 
These genes are most likely activated by INFγ [ 39 ] . 
We can not fully exclude that dilution of IFNγ-producing cells in the heterogeneous cell population of mucosal scrapings has lead to undetectable levels of this regulatory cytokine in the present study . 
At the later timepoints , serum IFNγ is strongly increased , whereas mucosal IFNγ remained below detection levels at all timepoints . 
This may suggest that systemic rather than colonic IFNγ seems to be the trigger for the later activation of IFNγ-related genes and - proc-esses in colonic mucosa upon Salmonella infection . 
However , dilution of IFNγ producing cells in colonic tis ¬ 
As many as 1200 genes are known to be regulated by IFNγ . 
Their gene products are mediators of the immune response essential for host defense against pathogens . 
One group of clearly regulated IFNγ-induced genes is the GTPase family , which modulates survival of pathogens residing in phagosomes or vacuoles [ 39,40 ] . 
They are defined into three classes : Guanylate-binding proteins ( Gbp 's ) , the p47 GTPases and the Mx proteins . 
We found Salmonella-induced up-regulation of the first and second group , i.e. Gbp1 , Ifi47 , Gbp2 , Iigp and Irgm ( Table 2 ) . 
IFNγ induces expression of p47 GTPases via activation of Stat1 which was also increased by Salmonella at days 2 and 3 p.i. Mutant mice with gene disruptions in IFNγ or Stat1 are significantly compromised in their immune response to microbial infections , including salmonellosis [ 41 ] . 
Thus the increased expression of IFNγ-related genes in colonic mucosa in the present study confirms the earlier proposed role of this cytokine in Salmonella infection . 
Pancreatits associated protein
The colonic mucosal gene most highly induced by Salmo-nella infection on the array was Pap , which was confirmed by Q-PCR of individual rat samples . 
PAP is a member of the Reg III gene family , which includes Regenerating isletderived 3 gamma ( Reg3g ) which was also increased in our study . 
Pap expression is also increased in the rat ileal mucosa infected with S. enteritidis [ 3 ] and in the gastrointestinal tract of pigs infected with Salmonella typimurium [ 42 ] . 
Furthermore , significant up-regulation of intestinal mucosal Pap expression is described in IBD patients , whose bowel is chronically inflamed [ 43-45 ] . 
This suggests that PAP is a marker for acute as well as chronic inflammation . 
Biological functions of PAP in the intestine are not fully uncovered . 
Recently , it was proposed to function in innate immunity [ 44,46 ] . 
PAP was shown to have direct antimicrobial properties as it was able to bind and kill Gram-positive bacteria , but not Gram-negative Salmo-nella typhimurium [ 46 ] . 
Additional research will be needed to answer whether PAP is able to inhibit the growth of Sal-monella enteritidis . 
Pap and Reg3g are expressed in several tissues and organs , but the small intestine has the highest expression under normal conditions . 
Only very low levels can be found in colon [ 47 ] . 
Indeed , Pap mRNA expression for most non-infected rats was below detection level ( figure 4 ) . 
Three rats did not express Pap at timepoint day 3 p.i. ( figure 4 ) , whereas at day 6 p.i. all rats expressed increased levels of Pap . 
Variation in infection kinetics between ( outbred ) rats is obviously reflected in Pap expression . 
We are currently investigating which mucosal cell types contain PAP and whether it is secreted to the intestinal lumen or to the serosal ( blood ) site . 
If secreted , 
Calprotectin
Calprotectin ( S100a8/a9 ) , a heterodimer of the two cal-cium-binding proteins S100A8 and S100A9 , was up-regu-lated in the colonic mucosa by Salmonella ( Table 2 ) . 
Both subunits were increased in colon . 
Calprotectin is a 36 kDa calcium and zinc binding protein and constitutes approximately 60 % of soluble cytosolic proteins in neutrophil granulocytes . 
Therefore , calprotectin is a marker of neutrophil influx and is elevated in a number of inflammatory conditions . 
In agreement with our results , Naughton et al ( 1996 ) also found increased levels of this marker in Salmonella-infected animals . 
Fecal calprotectin is emerging as a useful marker to quantify mucosal inflammation , not in the least because it appears to be stable in feces which can be obtained by non-invasive means [ 48 ] . 
Differences between colon and ileum
Ileum and colon are both targets for Salmonella . 
Remarka-bly , the number of genes showing increased expression is larger than the number of genes showing decreased expression upon Salmonella infection in both ileum and colon . 
However , this is more extreme in colon than in ileum mucosa [ 5 ] . 
Technical bias is unlikely as in a flavo-noid intervention study with rats and using the same array system and data handling the number of down-regulated genes was similar to the number of up-regulated genes [ 49 ] . 
In an in vivo Salmonella infection study in pigs only up-regulated and no down-regulated genes were observed [ 42 ] . 
The extent of the early response to Salmonella is similar for both intestinal segments : From all genes expressed above background level on the arrays , 0.21 % of the genes expressed in the colon and 0.26 % of genes expressed in the ileum [ 5 ] were affected at day 1 p.i. . 
The colonic response is less than the ileal response at day 3 p.i. , as 0.15 % of colonic mucosal genes were affected versus 0.67 % of ileal mucosal genes . 
The smaller colonic response could be due to differences in crypt-villus architecture of the ileal and colonic mucosa . 
Furthermore , the colonic mucosa , which is constitutively exposed to bacteria , might be more efficient in repressing host - or more specifically immunological responses to bacteria , including pathogens [ 50-52 ] . 
Ileum and colon show overlapping as well as distinct processes affected upon oral infection [ 5 ] . 
At early time points after oral infection i.e. transport processes and anti-microbial defenses were regulated in both intestinal segments , but the process-related genes did not fully overlap . 
At day 1 p.i. , glucose transporters were increased in the ileum , whereas in colon ion transporters were induced . 
The role of ion transporters in water absorption support involvement of the distal part of the gut in diarrhea development during salmonellosis as reported earlier in humans [ 6 ] . 
The gene coding for antimicrobial defensin 5 was down-regulated by Salmonella in both ileum and colon . 
Other genes coding for antimicrobial proteins ( Pla2g2a and lysozym ) were clearly enhanced in the infected colon in contrast to ileal tissue [ 5 ] . 
At day 3 and 6 p.i. Salmonella reduced the expression of several phase I and II detoxification genes in the ileum , which was not observed in the colon . 
The downregulation of cytochrome P450 genes in ileum coincided with increased expression of inflammatory genes . 
It is known that inflammatory mediators can down-regulate cytochrome P450 genes [ 5,53,54 ] . 
This might suggest that the inflammatory response induced by Salmonella in colon , at later timepoints , is smaller than in ileum . 
Nevertheless , both tissues showed signs of an inflammatory response at later timepoints , but responsible genes were not the same . 
Mainly cytokines and chemokines were induced in the ileum , whereas in colon many interferon-related genes were upregulated . 
No interferon response was observed in the ileum . 
Apparently , the immune response in the two intes-tinal segments is differentially regulated . 
Finally , the in vivo transcriptional response of intact mucosa to invasion by Salmonella is represented by a limited number of regulated genes compared to in vitro studies with HT-29 cells [ 24 ] . 
In vitro models provide insight in complex mechanisms of Salmonella-host interaction . 
However , results should be interpreted with caution as in vitro systems show massive cell death at 24 hours , whereas only minor inflammatory changes are observed in the intestine 24 hours after infection with Salmonella in vivo [ 55 ] . 
Several genes like Toll like receptors , Nf-κb or Il-8 that are regulated by Salmonella in vitro , were not found to be regulated by Salmonella infection in the present in vivo study . 
Possibly , transcription of these genes is highly specific for particular cell types in the colonic mucosa . 
Identification of cell type-specific responses of potential target cells could be addressed in vivo using laser microdissection . 
FOS and mucosal barrier function
We consistently observed that diets supplemented with rapidly-fermentable prebiotics ( such as FOS ) increased translocation of S. enteritidis in rat infection studies despite stimulation of Bifidobacteria and Lactobacilli [ 23 ] . 
In other words , FOS decreases the resistance of the rat intestinal mucosa to intestinal pathogens . 
Because fermentation of FOS hardly occurs in the ileum of humans [ 14 ] and rats [ 15 ] , it is unlikely that prebiotics facilitated translocation of Salmonella in the ileum . 
This is supported by the absence of ileal inflammation in FOS-fed and Sal-monella-infected rats in contrast to profound cecal and colonic inflammation [ 11 ] The precise mechanism underlying the effects of FOS on the colon mucosa is not known . 
FOS itself , the changed intestinal microflora or its fermentation products ( e.g. SCFA ) could play a role . 
Preb-iotics , such as FOS resist enzymatic hydrolysis by digestive enzymes secreted in the small intestine and reach the colon intact . 
The resident colonic microflora ferments these carbohydrates to lactic acid and short-chain fatty acids ( SCFA ) . 
This results in lowering of the pH of intestinal contents and stimulation of e.g. Bifidobacteria and Lactobacilli [ 23,56 ] . 
These lactic acid bacteria are assumed to enhance resistance [ 12 ] but we found opposite effects [ 11,23 ] . 
As shown earlier , dietary FOS increases intestinal permeability in non-infected rats and even more in infected rats [ 13 ] . 
At present it is unknown whether intes-tinal permeability is increased in ileum or colon , nor whether it is induced by the presence of FOS or by its fermentation metabolites . 
It has been shown that SCFA can induce colonic mucosal injury and increase permeability [ 10 ] . 
Furthermore , in vitro studies showed that SCFA can enhance expression of virulence ( e.g. invasion ) genes of Salmonella typhimurium [ 57,58 ] , but data on in vivo consequences have not been reported . 
Preliminary experiments of our lab showed no evidence for increased expression of virulence genes of Salmonella enteritidis in infected rats fed a FOS-diet ( unpublished results ) . 
From two independent rat infection studies we identified 26 colonic mucosal genes consistently affected by Salmo-nella . 
These ` robust ' Salmonella target genes were all further induced by the FOS diet . 
The pronounced effects of FOS on Salmonella translocation were reflected by a modest but highly consistent increase of all Salmonella target genes . 
Moreover , the total number of genes induced by Salmo-nella is nearly 3 times higher in FOS-fed rats than in cellu-lose-fed rats . 
However , biological processes identified to be affected by Salmonella in colon of FOS-fed rats were not different from those observed in cellulose-fed rats . 
So , the quality of the colonic response was the same , but clearly the magnitude of the response was increased by FOS feeding . 
Based on the physiological effects , larger gene expression differences might have been expected . 
The modest responses observed might be due to our focus on Salmo-nella-induced gene expression . 
It can not be totally excluded that FOS targets other genes and processes related to barrier function ( in absence of infection ) than Salmonella . 
However , the genes affected by Salmonella in FOS-fed rats did not show involvement of additional processes in comparison to their cellulose-fed counterparts . 
In our view , the enhanced expression of colonic Sal-monella target genes in FOS-fed animals concomitant with stimulated translocation of this invasive pathogen indicates that infection and related inflammation is worsened by FOS supplementation . 
Histological analyses of intestinal samples from previous FOS intervention studies of our lab did not show presence of intestinal mucosal inflammation in non-infected FOS-fed rats in contrast to post-infection samples ( data not shown ) . 
Therefore , we feel that the observed aggravation of the intestinal response is due to interaction of FOS and Salmonella . 
It should be stressed , that genes identified as Salmonella target genes in the present study are not necessarily Salmo-nella specific , but may well result from colonic inflammation in general and thus be similar in other enteric infections . 
Furthermore , effects of dietary FOS on gut barrier function may not be restricted to changes in mRNA expression , but exist on the translational or functional level of proteins . 
For instance , internalization of the tight-junction proteins occludin , claudin and junctional adhesion molecule-A , caused by IFNγ , results in profound mucosal barrier changes [ 59 ] . 
This cellular translocation can occur without concomitant changes in mRNA gene expression . 
Detection of such effects would require a different approach from transcriptomics . 
Many studies report on possible therapeutic effects of FOS on intestinal disease such as IBD and pathogenic infection . 
In addition to an increase in '' beneficial '' bacteria , the potential beneficial effects of FOS are based on the effects on surrogate markers , e.g. increase of mucin production [ 60 ] , increase of the size and cytokine production of Peyer 's patches and increased faecal or ileal IgA [ 61-63 ] . 
Changes in these markers are often presumed to reflect increased barrier function or resistance to pathogenic bacteria , but concom-itant actual measurements of these functional effects are missing . 
In our study , genes involved in antimicrobial defense , immune response and inflammation were all induced by Salmonella infection and further enhanced by dietary FOS , but concomitantly translocation of Salmo-nella was evident and stimulated by FOS . 
Therefore , these surrogate markers should be interpreted with caution and always correlated with functional effects or clinical endpoints . 
In this study we compared Salmonella-induced gene expression changes of two independent rat infection experiments at early time points after oral infection . 
The gene expression results were analyzed at two levels , at the level of gene expression itself and at the level of biological processes . 
Analysis at the level of gene expression showed some variation in the expression of individual genes between the two studies ( table 2 , Additional File 3 ) . 
This variation between two studies can be due to the different time-points studied and the use of outbred rats showing inter-individual differences in infection kinetics . 
Rats did not all respond to Salmonella at the same time p.i. which is e.g. shown by individual gene expression levels of PAP ( figure 4 ) and by serum IFNγ levels ( figure 3 ) . 
Variation in infection kinetics and inter-individual variation are expected features of infection studies in outbred species 
[ 64 ] . 
It can be argued that differences between studies , due to differences in time points measured or infection kinetics , will result in more pronounced variance at the level of individual genes than at the level of physiological processes [ 65,66 ] . 
Indeed , analysis of gene expression at the level of biological processes showed that both studies gave highly comparable Salmonella-induced effects at early time points . 
In the dietary infection study , we were interested whether the FOS-stimulated Salmonella translocation was reflected in colonic gene expression changes . 
We observed an overlap in gene expression changes observed in the two experimental diets , and an additional set of 58 genes which were only significantly affected in the FOS-fed rats . 
Although the list of altered genes was different in FOS fed rats , this was not the case at the process level as exactly the same processes were observed for both dietary groups . 
This indicates involvement of similar underlying biological processes in cellulose and FOS-fed infected rats and no obvious role for other processes . 
Comparison at the level of biological processes is a powerful tool to interpret microarray experiments and enables comparison of different microarray datasets [ 67 ] . 
Comparison at gene level has some drawbacks , one is redundancy in gene function , which means that different genes can provide the same physiological effect . 
In addition , the homeostatic condition as well as the precise nature of the stimulus will determine how individual genes within a process are controlled to provide the necessary physiological response . 
Differences in responses of individual genes are filtered out when they are analyzed at the level of pathways or processes . 
However , the translation of differentially expressed genes into biological processes also suffers from limitations [ 68 ] . 
The most important limitation is that annotations to pathways and processes are incomplete . 
Therefore it is important that results from pathway analysis are manually supplemented with the remaining significant genes using biological databases and scientific literature . 
Conclusion
In conclusion , our results show that , in addition to the ileum , the colon mucosa is clearly a target for Salmonella infection . 
Early Salmonella-induced changes were observed in transport and oxidative stress , while at later stage , most likely secondary , infection and inflammation responses were observed . 
Some findings confirm expected results , such as induction of an immune and inflammatory response . 
However , the Salmonella-induced immune response in colon is clearly different from that in ileum . 
We newly identified that colonic transport processes and proteolysis are affected by Salmonella infection and that pancreatitis associated protein was the most responsive gene in Salmonella infected rat colon . 
An important observation is that FOS-stimulated Salmo-nella translocation ( as measured by urinary NOx ) , does not induce other processes than those observed in cellu-lose-fed and Salmonella infected rats . 
So , the quality or diversity of the colonic host response to Salmonella is not affected by colonic FOS fermentation in contrast to the magnitude of response . 
As far as we know , there are no literature data pointing to a functional effect of FOS in the ileum . 
Therefore , the FOS effects on Salmonella translocation are most likely due to colonic effects . 
Understanding the changes caused by FOS alone may provide insight in processes that ultimately result in the observed weakening of the barrier . 
Methods Time course infection study
Animals , diet and infection The experimental protocols were approved by the animal welfare committee of Wageningen University ( Wageningen , the Netherlands ) . 
Specific pathogen-free male outbred 9 weeks old Wister rats ( WU , Harlan , Horst , the Netherlands , n = 48 in total ) , were housed individually in metabolic cages . 
All animals were kept in a temperature ( 22 -- 24 °C ) and humidity ( 50 -- 60 % ) controlled room with a 12 h light/dark cycle ( lights on from 6 AM to 6 PM ) . 
Rats were fed a purified diet during the whole experimental period . 
The diet contained ( per kg ) 200 g acid casein , 502 g glucose , 160 g palm oil , 40 g corn oil , 50 g cellulose , 35 g mineral mix ( without calcium ) and 10 g vitamin mix according to AIN93 recommendations [ 69 ] . 
Diets were low in calcium content ( 20 mmol CaHPO4 .2 H2O/kg ) and high in fat content ( 200 g fat/kg ) [ 16 ] to mimic the composition of a Western human diet . 
Food and demineralized drinking water were supplied ad libitum . 
The animals were acclimatized to the housing and dietary condition for 11 days , after which they were orally infected with S. enteritidis ( clinical isolate , phage type 4 according to international standards ; B1214 culture of NIZO food research , Ede , the Netherlands ) . 
Salmonella infection was performed by gastric gavage with 1 mL of saline containing 3 × 109 colony forming units ( CFU ) of S. enteritidis . 
Noninfected rats received saline only ( control ) . 
S. enteritidis was cultured and stored , as described earlier [ 23 ] . 
Fresh fecal samples were collected on days 1 , 2 , 3 and 6 post infection ( p.i. ) and analyzed for viable Salmonella by plating 10-fold dilutions in sterile saline on Modified Brilliant Green Agar ( Oxoid , Basingstoke , UK ) and incubating aerobically overnight at 37 °C . 
Sulphamandelate ( Oxoid ) was added to the agar plates to suppress swarming bacteria , such as Proteus species . 
The detection limit of this method was 102 CFU/g fecal wet weight . 
Total 24 h urine samples were collected from the day before oral infection of the rats until day 6 after infection . 
Urines were preserved by adding oxytetracycline to the urine collection vessels of the metabolic cages , and analyzed for the nitric oxide metabolites nitrite and nitrate ( summed as NOx ) by a colorimetric method ( Nr . 
1746081 ; Roche diagnostics , Mannheim , Germany ) . 
Rats were sacrificed on day 1 , 3 or 6 post infection and control ( n = 8 rats per treatment and per time point ) . 
Rats were killed by carbon dioxide inhalation . 
Blood was collected by orbita puncture . 
Blood was coagulated for 30 minutes at room temperature , cooled to 4 °C and centri-fuged 20 minutes by 3000 g. Serum was collected and fro-zen at -80 °C . 
The mesenteric lymph nodes ( MLN ) , spleen and liver were excised aseptically , weighed , homogenized ( Ultraturrax Pro200 , Pro Scientific Inc. . 
Oxford , CT ) in sterile saline , serially diluted , and plated to culture for Sal-monella , as described above . 
The detection limit was 102 CFU/g tissue . 
To obtain colonic mucosa , the colon was taken out , longitudinally opened and colonic contents removed by a quick rinse in 154 mM KCl . 
The mucosa was scraped off using a spatula . 
The scrapings were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C for RNA extraction . 
RNA isolation
Colon scrapings were homogenized in liquid N2 using a mortar and pestle cooled with liquid N2 . 
( Fisher Emergo , Landsmeer , The Netherlands ) . 
Total RNA was isolated from these homogenates using TRIzol reagent ( Invitrogen , San Diego , CA ) according to the manufacturer 's instructions . 
Total RNA was purified using Rneasy col-umns ( Qiagen , Chatsworth , CA ) . 
Absence of RNA degradation was checked on a 1 % TBE/agarose gel after 1 hour incubation at 37 °C . 
The purity and concentration were measured with the Nanodrop ( Isogen Life Science , Maars-sen , The Netherlands ) . 
OD A260/A280 ratios were all between 2.08 and 2.10 indicating RNA of high purity . 
Analysis of mRNA expression by Oligo Arrays
For microarray hybridization , equal amounts of RNA of each animal were pooled per treatment group . 
Arrays were performed in duplicate . 
For this , RNA pools were split and separately reverse transcribed and labeled with Cy-5 . 
A standard reference sample , consisting of a pool of all colonic RNA was labeled with Cy-3 . 
For each oligo array , 35 µg of total RNA was used to make Cy-5 or Cy-3 labeled cDNA . 
Total RNA was mixed with 4 µg T21 primer , heated at 65 °C for 3 min ( RNA denaturation ) followed by 25 °C for 10 min ( primer annealing ) . 
cDNA was synthesized by adding 5 × first strand buffer ( Invitrogen ) , 10 mM DTT , 0.5 mM dATP , 0.5 mM dGTP , 0.5 mM dTTP , 0.04 mM dCTP , 0.04 mM Cy5-dCTP or Cy3-dCTP , 1.2 U RnaseOUT and 6 U SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase to a total volume of 62.5 µL . 
The reaction was incubated at 42 °C for 2 h. Puri-fication , precipitation and denaturation of the labeled cDNA were performed as described earlier [ 70 ] . 
The 44 K rat whole genome Agilent array ( G4131A , Agilent Technologies , Inc. . 
Santa Clara , CA ) used consists of 44290 60-mer rat oligonucleotides , including ~ 3000 control spots . 
The Cy5 labeled cDNAs of the Salmonella infected groups and the non-infected groups were mixed 1:1 with the Cy3 reference labeled cDNA , mixed with 2 × hybridization buffer ( Agilent Technologies ) and 10 × control targets ( Agilent Technologies ) and hybridized for 17 hours at 60 °C in Agilent hybridization chambers in an Agilent hybridization oven rotating at 4 rpm ( Agilent Technologies ) . 
After hybridization the arrays were washed with an SSPE wash procedure ( Agilent Technologies ) and scanned with an Agilent Microarray Scanner ( Agilent Technologies ) . 
Data analysis
Signal intensities for each spot were quantified using Feature Extraction 8.1 ( Agilent Technologies ) . 
The data of the time course infections study are available in Additional File 4 and have been deposited in NCBIs Gene Expression Omnibus [ 71 ] and are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE7496 . 
Median density values and background values of each spot were extracted for both the experimental samples ( Cy5 ) and the reference samples ( Cy3 ) . 
Quality check was performed for each micro-array using both LimmaGUI package in R from Bioconductor [ 72 ] and Microsoft Excel . 
Data was exported into GeneMaths XT ( Applied Maths , Sint-Martens-Latem , Belgium ) for analysis . 
We discarded spots with an average intensity , over all arrays , of Cy5 lower than 2-fold above average background . 
Then , the Cy5 intensities were normalized against the Cy3 reference as described before [ 73 ] . 
The gene expressions of duplicate arrays were averaged . 
Array data of non-infected rats , killed on section day 1 and 6 were highly comparable and could therefore be considered as one group and were averaged . 
For unknown reason , arrays of non-infected rats killed on day 3 showed reduced expression of 14 mast cell protease genes when compared with non-infected rats of both days 1 and 6 , which were highly comparable . 
Therefore , we decided not to include the non-infected rats of day 3 . 
Cluster analysis and Principle component analysis were performed using GeneMaths XT . 
Infected/control ratio 's between 0 -- 1 were expressed as the negative inverse ( -1 / value ) for easier interpretation . 
Genes that changed more than 2-fold in comparison with controls at one of the time points studied were selected for pathway analysis . 
Pathway analysis was performed using two pathway programs , MetaCore ( GeneGo Inc , St. Joseph , MI ) [ 18 ] and ErmineJ [ 19 ] , using Agilent gene annotation ( Agilent Technologies , version 20060331 ) . 
Processes were identified using statistical over-representation in both pathway programs . 
Since only 40 % of the genes were annotated to GO processes in both pathway programs , processes with a p-value < 0.001 were manually supplemented with non-annotated genes with FC > 2 using biological databases ( BIOcarta , SOURCE , GenMAPP , KEGG ) and scientific literature . 
Analysis of mRNA expression by Real-time Quantitative RT-PCR Real-time Quantitative RT-PCR ( Q-PCR ) was performed on individual samples ( n = 8 per group ) . 
1 µg of RNA of all individual samples was used for the cDNA synthesis using the iScript cDNA synthesis kit of Bio-Rad Laboratories ( Veenendaal , The Netherlands ) . 
Real-time reactions were performed by means of the iQ SYBR Green Supermix of Bio-Rad using the MyIQ single-color real-time PCR detection system ( Bio-Rad ) . 
Each reaction ( 25 µl ) contained 12.5 µl iQ SYBR green supermix , 1 µl forward primer ( 10 µM ) , 1 µl reverse primer ( 10 µM ) , 8.5 µl RNase-free water and 2 µl diluted cDNA . 
The following cycles were performed 1 × 3 min at 95 °C , 40 amplification cycles ( 40 × 10 s 95 °C , 45 s 60 °C ) , 1 × 1 min 95 °C , 1 × 1 min 62 °C and a melting curve ( 80 × 10 s 55 °C with an increase of 0.5 °C per 10 s ) . 
A negative control without cDNA template was run with every assay . 
The optimal melting point of dsDNA ( Tm ) and the efficiency of the reaction were optimized beforehand . 
Data were normalized against the reference genes Ribosomal protein S29 ( Rps29 ) , ADP-Ribosylation Factor 1 ( Arf1 ) and β-actin . 
Rps29 and Arf1 were chosen on the basis of microarray data which showed similar expression levels for all micro-arrays , β-actin was chosen as this is a well accepted reference gene . 
Primers were designed using Beacon designer 4 ( Premier Biosoft International , Palo Alto , CA ) . 
For sequences see Additional File 5 . 
A standard curve for all genes including reference genes was generated using serial dilutions of a pooled sample ( cDNA from all reactions ) . 
mRNA levels were determined from the appropriate standard curve . 
Samples with mRNA levels below the lowest standard value , and thus below detection level , were given half the value of this lowest standard . 
Analysis of all individual samples was performed in duplicate . 
Serum Interferon Gamma
The serum Interferon Gamma ( IFNγ ) concentration of individual rats was determined by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) specific for rats ( Biosource International , Camarillo , CA ) according to the manufacturer 's protocol . 
Dietary infection study Animals, diet and infection
A dietary intervention was performed to study the effect of FOS on S. enteritidis-induced gene expression . 
Specific pathogen-free male outbred Wister rats ( 8 weeks old , mean body weight of 253 g ; n = 48 in total ) were housed as described above ( time course infection study ) . 
Rats were fed the same diet as described above . 
The experimental diets both contained 20 g/kg cellulose and were supplemented with either 60 g/kg FOS ( purity 93 % ; Raftilose P95 , Orafti , Tienen , Belgium ) or additional 60 g/kg cellulose as described earlier [ 23 ] . 
Animals were fed restricted quantities ( 14 g/day ) of the purified diet . 
Restricted food intake was necessary to prevent differences in food consumption and hence differences in vitamin and mineral intake as observed earlier in FOS interventions [ 11 ] . 
After an adaptation period of 14 days , rats were orally infected 8 with 4 × 10 CFU of S. enteritidis or control-treated as described above . 
On day 2 p.i. , 12 infected FOS-fed rats , 12 infected rats fed the cellulose diet , and 12 control-treated non-infected rats fed the cellulose diet were sacrificed to obtain colonic mucosal RNA . 
Two additional groups of rats fed either FOS ( n = 6 ) or the cellulose diet ( n = 6 ) and infected with Salmonella were kept until day 8 p.i. for determination of urinary NOx excretion in time as described above . 
Analysis of mRNA expression by Oligo Arrays and Real-time Quantitative RT-PCR RNA isolation and analysis of mRNA expression by micro-array ( pooled samples ) and Q-PCR ( n = 12 per treatment group ) were performed as described above . 
Arrays were scanned with a Scanarray Express HT scanner ( Perkin Elmer ) . 
Signal intensities for each spot were quantified using ArrayVision 8.0 ( GE Healthcare life sciences ) . 
Data analysis was performed as described above . 
The data of the dietary infection study available in Additional File 6 and have been deposited in NCBIs Gene Expression Omnibus [ 71 ] and are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE7472 . 
Statistical analysis
Results are expressed as median or mean depending on normality of distribution as indicated . 
We used Prism 4 for all statistics ( Prism 4 , GraphPad software Inc. , San Diego , CA ) . 
Data was analyzed using the Student 's t-test ( two-sided ) . 
Non-normally distributed data was analyzed using the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test ( two sided ) . 
Differences were considered statistically significant when p < 0.05 . 
Authors' contributions
WR , EK , CV and SR performed the experiments . 
WR performed the data analysis , interpreted the results and drafted the manuscript . 
JK and IB participated in the design of the study , in evaluation of the results and in revision of the manuscript . 
RvdM and MK discussed the results and critically read the manuscript . 
All authors read and approved the final manuscript . 
Additional file 6
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Wilma Blauw and Judith Hulsman at the Small Animal Center of Wageningen University ( Wageningen , The Netherlands ) for expert assistance . 
We also thank our colleagues of the RIKILT Food Bioactives group and NIZO Health & Safety for technical support and helpful discussions . 
Fully funded by TI Food and Nutrition .