A 
RTICLE 
The Investigation of Protein A and Salmonella Antibody Adsorption Onto Biosensor Surfaces A c Force Microscopy
by 
tomi 
Kyoung G. Lee ,1 Shreekumar R. Pillai ,2 Shree R. Singh ,2 Gerold A. Willing1 1 Department of Chemical Engineering , University of Louisville , Louisville , Kentucky 40292 ; telephone : þ1-502-852-7860 ; fax : þ1-502-852-6355 ; e-mail : gerold.willing@louisville.edu 2 Department of Mathematics and Science , Alabama State University , Montgomery , Alabama 
Received 30 May 2007 ; revision received 14 August 2007 ; accepted 27 August 2007 
Published online 18 September 2007 in Wiley InterScience ( www.interscience.wiley.com ) . 
DOI 10.1002 / bit .21644 
ABSTRACT : The investigation of Protein A and antibody adsorption on surfaces in a biological environment is an important and fundamental step for increasing biosensor sensitivity and speciﬁcity . 
The atomic force microscope ( AFM ) is a powerful tool that is frequently used to characterize surfaces coated with a variety of molecules . 
We used AFM in conjunction with scanning electron microscopy to characterize the attachment of protein A and its subsequent binding to the antibody and Salmonella bacteria using a gold quartz crystal . 
The rms roughness of the base gold surface was determined to be approximately 1.30 nm . 
The average step height change between the solid gold and protein A layer was approximately 3.0 1.0 nm , while the average step height of the protein A with attached antibody was approximately 6.0 1.0 nm . 
We found that the antibodies did not completely cover the protein A layer , instead the attachment follows an island model . 
Salt crystals and water trapped under the protein A layer were also observed . 
The uneven adsorption of antibodies onto the biosensor surface might have led to a decrease in the sensitivity of the biosensor . 
The presence of salt crystals and water under the protein A layer may deteriorate the sensor speciﬁcity . 
In this report , we have discussed the application and characterization of protein A bound to antibodies which can be used to detect bacterial and viral pathogens . 
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2008;99: 949–959. 2007 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
KEYWORDS: atomic force microscopy; biosensor; protein A; quartz crystal; scanning electron microscopy
Kyoung G. Lee 's present address is Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering , Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 373-1 , Guseongdong , Yuseong-gu , Daejeon 305-701 , Republic of Korea . 
Correspondence to : G.A. Willing Contract grant sponsor : NIH-MBRS Contract grant number : 2S06 GM008219-200012 Contract grant sponsor : NSF-HBCU-UP Contract grant number : 0505872 
Introduction
The investigation of protein A and antibody adsorption on surfaces in a biological environment is an important and fundamental step to many ﬁelds , including medicine , biosensors and bioengineering applications . 
The adsorption of protein A and antibodies is one of the primary concerns for biosensor development as the thickness of the protein layer and orientation of the antibody might be associated with loss of sensitivity and low reproducibility ( Kanno et al. , 1999 ; Wang et al. , 2004 ) . 
The development of methods to position , manipulate and image the protein and antibody layers is important for the study of biosensor development . 
Protein A is a cell wall protein which is produced by most strains of Staphlylcoccus aureus and exists as a single polypeptide chain . 
The molecular weight of protein A is about 42 kDa and it has a very extended shape ( Horisberger and Clerc , 1985 ) . 
Protein A can be used in a directed antibody immobilization method because of the natural afﬁnity towards the Fc region of immunoglobulin molecules which does not block the active sites of the antibodies for analyte binding ( Babacan et al. , 2000 ) . 
Due to the high stabilization of the gold-protein A complex , gold-protein A has the best potential to be used in an antibody immobilization method ( Babacan et al. , 2000 ; Davis and Leary , 1989 ) . 
The quartz crystal microbalance ( QCM ) and atomic force microscope ( AFM ) are the most common instruments used to conﬁrm the adsorption of a protein layer ( Kim et al. , 2004 ) . 
The QCM is a real time mass sensing device with high sensitivity to very small mass changes on a quartz crystal resonator . 
Due to its sensitivity , it is an easy method for in situ monitoring of biomolecular interactions in air and aqueous solutions ( Zhang et al. , 2005 ) . 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering , Vol . 
99 , No. 4 , March 1 , 2008 94 
2007 Wiley Periodicals , Inc. . 
AFM can be used to investigate the interaction between nanometer scale biological objects and the dynamic behavior of biological systems in air and aqueous solutions ( Chen et al. , 2005 ; Hansma et al. , 1994 ) . 
AFM has been used to improve the understanding of biosensor systems by investigating protein layer characteristics and properties through high resolution imaging ( Kim et al. , 2004 ) . 
Additionally , AFM is a powerful tool for characterizing single biological molecules , macromolecular assemblies and intermolecular forces ( Kuhlmeier et al. , 2003 ; Kumar and Hoh , 2001 ; Lee et al. , 2003 ; Wang et al. , 2004 ) . 
In this report , we focus on using AFM and scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) to characterize the stages of biosensor development , ( i.e. , protein A and antibody adsorption onto a gold quartz crystal surface ) . 
AFM was employed as an analytical tool to evaluate the surface roughness of the gold quartz crystals and the surface morphology of the protein A and antibody layers attached to the gold quartz crystals utilizing a combination of tapping and contact mode . 
The combination of these modes allowed us to investigate the mechanism of protein and antibody attachment onto the gold quartz crystal surface , which is a fundamental process required for biosensor development . 
SEM images provided the additional data to prove the attachment of protein A to the gold quartz crystal and subsequent attachment of bacterial samples . 
Materials and Methods
Bacterial Strains and Antigens
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium ( ATCC 13311 ) was obtained from American Type Culture Collection ( ATCC , Manassas , VA ) , while E. coli MM294 ( ATCC 33625 ) was obtained from Carolina Biological Supply Company ( Burlington , NC ) and both cultures were used in the various experiments . 
The bacterial cultures were maintained on nutrient agar slants . 
All bacterial cultures were tested using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) to conﬁrm their reactivity with their respective antibodies used in the experiments . 
Anti-Salmonella polyclonal antibodies were obtained from Fitzgerald Industries International ( Concord , MA ) . 
Growth of Cultures and Colony Forming Unit (CFU) Determination
CFU were determined by the standard plate count as described previously ( Chen and Godwin , 2006 ) with minor modiﬁcations . 
Brieﬂy , 10 mL of each bacterial culture of S. typhimurium and E. coli were inoculated individually into 5 mL of fresh nutrient broth and incubated overnight at 378C while shaking . 
One serial 10-fold ( 10 1 -- 10 9 ) dilution of each culture was then made in nutrient broth . 
All tubes were thoroughly vortexed and 50 mL of each dilution were inoculated onto nutrient agar plates in duplicate . 
The cultures were spread evenly on the surface of the plates using a sterile spreader and the plates were incubated overnight at 378C . 
The numbers of colony forming units ( cfu ) per mL were determined by multiplying the average number of colonies ( visible to the naked eye ) on the surface of the nutrient agar plates by the reciprocal of the serial dilution factor and the reciprocal of the inoculum volume fraction . 
The average CFU calculations were based on dilutions yielding 50 -- 200 colonies per plate . 
Tubes containing the diluted cells were sealed and placed at 48C until testing . 
Piezoelectric Quartz Crystals
Several 100 unpolished , AT-cut , 5 MHz piezoelectric quartz crystals ( QC ) obtained from Maxtek ( Santa Fe Springs , CA ) were washed with mild ( 1:100 ) BacDown solution in deionized water . 
The crystals were then soaked in 1 M NaOH for 20 min . 
Following NaOH treatment , each QC was rinsed with deionized water and soaked in 1 M HCl for 10 min . 
Immediately after HCl treatment , the QCs were rinsed with deionized water . 
The QCs were washed with 95 % ethanol and allowed to air dry before further use for protein A attachment and antibody experiments . 
Immobilization of Protein-A and Antibodies
Twenty microliters of Protein-A ( ten micrograms dissolved in 0.05 M potassium phosphate buffer ) obtained from Sigma -- Aldrich ( St. Louis , MO ) were mixed with 20 mL of Sodium Acetate Buffer ( 0.1 M , pH 4.69 ) . 
The mixture was added to the gold sensing surface of the unpolished QCs and incubated in a humidiﬁed chamber for 2 h at 428C . 
The QCs immobilized with the Protein-A mixture were used for scanning electron microscope and AFM analysis . 
After rinsing with cold Potassium Phosphate Buffer ( 0.05 M ) , 20 mL of anti-Salmonella polyclonal antibodies were added to the crystal and incubated in a humidi-ﬁed chamber for 2 h at 428C . 
The crystals were again rinsed with Potassium Phosphate Buffer . 
The crystals attached with Protein-A and anti-Salmonella antibodies were used for both the scanning electron microscopy and AFM imaging . 
Bacterial Attachment of QCs With Protein A
Twenty microliters of each culture were added to the QCs which were attached with protein A along with antiSalmonella antibodies . 
QCs without anti-Salmonella antibodies were also used as control crystals . 
The crystals were incubated overnight in a humidiﬁed chamber at 428C . 
The crystals were washed with ( 1 ) Phosphate Buffered Saline , fume ﬁxed with 4 % Osmium tetroxide and used for SEM analysis . 
QCs attached with protein A , anti-Salmonella antibodies and S. typhimurium were used for scanning electron microscopy . 
QCs were placed in an inclined petridish , and 2 mL of 4 % Osmium tetroxide were added to the lower end of the petridish to avoid direct contact with the crystals . 
The petridishes were covered and the bacteria were ﬁxed by exposure to the osmium tetroxide vapors overnight in a humid chamber at room temperature . 
The crystals were then sputter coated with gold using an EMS 550 X sputter coater ( Electron Microscopy Sciences , Fort Washington , PA ) . 
SEM analysis was performed and digital images of the crystals were captured and evaluated using a DSM940 scanning electron Microscope ( Zeiss SMT , Thornwood , NY ) . 
Atomic Force Microscopy Imaging
Figure 1 . 
Bare gold quartz surface prior to protein adsorption ( 10 10 mm2 ) [ Color ﬁgure can be seen in the online version of this article , available at www . 
interscience.wiley.com . ] . 
AFM imaging was performed by tapping and contact mode at a room temperature and under ambient conditions . 
A Digital Instruments ' Nanoman/Dimension 3100 ( Digital Instrument , Santa Barbara , CA ) was used for all AFM ana-lysis of the QCs . 
Non-conductive silicon nitride cantilevers ( model DNP-1 ; Digital Instruments ) which had a frequency between 40 and 75 KHz , a normal radius of 20 nm , and a spring constant of 0.12 N/m were used for contact mode imaging . 
Non-reﬂex coating silicon cantilevers ( Budget Sensors-TAP300 ; NanoScience Instruments , Phoenix , AZ ) which had a frequency between 200 and 400 KHz , a nominal radius less than 10 nm , and a spring constant of between 20 and 75 N/m were used for tapping mode . 
The scan rate was set at 0.4 -- 0.5 Hz for both tapping and contact mode . 
Additional images of the QCs with adsorbed Salmonella were created using a PSIA XE-100 AFM ( Park Systems , Santa Clara , CA ) operating in non-contact mode using ACTA non-contact mode tips with a frequency between 200 and 400 KHz and a nomical radius of 6 nm . 
All AFM images presented in this work are tapping or non-contact mode images that have undergone a slope correction in the image software . 
All images and data were evaluated by using the analysis tools in the Nanoscope Software ( Nanoscope version 6.13 , Copyright 2002 Digital Instruments ) or in the XEI Image Processing Software ( XEI version 1.6 , Copyright 2005 PSIA Inc. . ) 
Results and Discussion
Analysis of Gold Quartz Crystal Surfaces
The bare quartz crystals were ﬁrst analyzed without either protein A attachment or any other chemical treatments . 
The gold quartz crystal surface shown in Figure 1 is within the active area for protein adsorption . 
The sample images were obtained at a low tapping force to insure minimal damage to the QC surface . 
This was done by using a set point ratio ( Rsp ) , which is the ratio of the amplitude set point during imaging to the amplitude set point on initial surface contact , of 0.8 . 
An Rsp of 0.8 -- 0.9 is generally considered to correspond to a light tapping force ( Whangbo et al. , 1997 ) . 
The value of an arithmetic average of the absolute values of the surface height deviations measured from the mean image data plane ( Rq ) , commonly referred to as rms roughness , is 1.30 nm . 
These results conﬁrmed that prior to any processing , the bare quartz crystals possessed a smooth imaging area and were found to be free of any contaminant layers which may hinder or interfere with the attachment of protein A. Additionally , the low degree of surface roughness will allow for easier visualization of protein A molecules attached to the gold surface . 
Analysis of QCs With Attached Protein A Layer
Protein A has a b-barrel structure that is cylindrical in shape with a diameter of 2.6 nm and a length of 5.7 nm , based on its crystal structure ( Pautsch and Schulz , 1998 ) . 
Figure 2 shows a tapping mode image of the gold surface with a coating of protein A . 
As seen in Figure 2 , the minimum feature size is approximately 20 nm which is larger than the reported 2.6 nm diameter of a single protein A molecule . 
This problem is most likely due to the fact that the nominal radius of a tapping mode tip is 10 nm or larger which limits the observable lateral resolution of surface features to the same size scale . 
Therefore , the single protein A molecule 's shape and conformation on a gold surface can not be determined by using this type of imaging alone . 
As such , alternative ways of characterizing the protein A layer on the gold surface are required . 
In addition to the AFM analysis , we also performed scanning electron microscopy to characterize the crystals coated with a protein A layer ( Fig. 3 ) . 
The SEM image shows salt crystals deposited from the buffer solution , which will be discussed later within this work . 
Protein A could not be visualized by SEM . 
However , this image could be used as a control to evaluate attachment of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium following antibody attachment to protein A. Another method by which the protein A layer can be characterized using the AFM is through a measurement of the layer step height . 
The concept behind this technique is that a small area of the protein A layer on the gold surface can be removed by applying a high force between a contact mode tip and the sensor surface which can be controlled through the AFM ( Wadu-Mesthrige et al. , 2001 ) . 
Varying the applied force to known areas of the surface and measuring step height difference between the applied force area and the surrounding area will allow us to determine not only if the protein layer is present , but also its thickness and how well it is attached to the gold surface . 
First , 20 mm images were taken using contact mode tips ( model : DNP-1 ) which have a spring constant of 0.12 N/m with a deﬂection set point of 2 V , which corresponds to a nominal contact force of 3.9 nN ( see Table I ) . 
At several different positions within the original 20 mm area , the 2 deﬂection set point was increased by 2 V increments up to 10 V and applied to individual 2 mm areas . 
Increasing the 2 set point within these areas effectively increases the force between the tip and the surface . 
After obtaining four smooth squares , the image size is again increased to 20 mm and the 2 deﬂection set point is decreased back to the initial value of 2 V ( Fig. 4 ) . 
Finally , the tip is replaced with a tapping mode tip with a resonance frequency of 300 KHz and tapping mode images are obtained . 
The step height can be measured with the analysis tools from the Nanoscope software by taking the difference between the average z-position of the pit and the average z-position of the protein A layer at a distance of 1 mm or more from the pit itself . 
This procedure eliminates the possibility of the accumulated protein on the edge of the pit and lateral compression of the protein layer near the pit from artiﬁcially inﬂating the value of the layer thickness . 
The top rectangle in Figure 4 was created with a deﬂection set point of 4 V , and the bottom rectangle was created with the deﬂection set point of 10 V which represents the maximum force applied to the surface . 
The average step height difference between the interior of the square and the rest of the surface was approximately 3.0 1.0 nm , which is within experimental error of the length of a single protein A b-barrel ( 5 nm ) , as mentioned previously . 
The difference is most likely due to the fact that the length of the b-barrel is based on the crystal structure of protein A whereas the thickness value is based on protein A in a more elastic state . 
This means that the imaging process may inﬂuence the measured thickness by slightly compressing the layer . 
Additionally , the ambient conditions may inﬂuence the layer thickness due to the presence of water in the ﬁgure can be seen in the online version of this article , available at www.interscience . 
wiley.com . ] 
atmosphere , though this effect is more difﬁcult to discern . 
Based on these considerations , we conclude that the gold quartz crystals are coated with a single layer , or a monolayer , of protein A molecules . 
This AFM ﬁnding matches the SEM image analysis discussed earlier . 
However , there is a possibility that the step height changes are due to damage done to the gold surface or protein A layer itself . 
With gold being a softer metal , it would not be unreasonable to assume that the force applied by the tip may create a depression within the gold . 
Therefore , another experiment was required to show how the gold surface might be damaged by the force applied onto the protein A samples . 
An identical series of experiments were performed on a sample without the protein A coating . 
Figure 5 shows the area where the different forces were applied to the bare gold quartz crystals . 
Where the highest force ( 8 and 10 V ) was applied to the gold quartz surface , the section height was actually higher ( 1.5 nm ) than in other sample areas where no force was applied . 
It should be noted that Figure 5 is a tapping mode image that was created after the high force 
Figure 1 . 
Bare gold quartz surface prior to protein adsorption ( 10 10 mm2 ) [ Color ﬁgure can be seen in the online version of this article , available at www . 
interscience.wiley.com . ] . 
Figure 2 . 
The gold quartz surface with protein A coating ( height : 5 nm , Area : 500 500 nm ) . 
[ Color ﬁgure can be seen in the online version of this article , available 2 
at www.interscience.wiley.com . ] 
Table I. Nominal applied force and corresponding pressure between the contact AFM Tip ( DNP-1 ) and the protein A coated gold surface at each deﬂection set point . 
Pressure ( GPa ) 
Force ( nN ) 
Deﬂection set point ( V ) 
1.46 2.95 3.54 3.95 4.38 
3.9 
2 4 
32.1 55.7 77.4 105.5 
6 8 10 
Figure 3 . 
SEM image of the gold quartz crystal after protein A attachment . 
Deposited salt crystal can be seen in the lower left hand corner . 
Bar length 1/4 5 mm . 
[ Color ﬁgure can be seen in the online version of this article , available at www . 
interscience.wiley.com . ] 
contact mode imaging had been performed which means that there is no inﬂuence of cantilever torsion , or what is commonly referred to as `` cross-talk , '' on the height image as one might expect to see in a contact mode image . 
Therefore the height difference is most likely due to either the introduction of defects into the gold ﬁlm resulting in a decrease in the local density of gold in those areas or delamination of the gold layer from the crystal substrate in those localized regions . 
Both cases would result in a local increase in the volume , and hence the height , in the damaged areas as is seen . 
However , there is no signiﬁcant section height change observed where the lowest of the increased forces ( 4 and 6 V ) is applied to the gold surface . 
At these lower applied forces , damage to the gold surface might not be as severe but still step height changes can still be observed in the protein A layer on the gold surface . 
Additionally , even with the high forces applied to the protein A layer , the amount of damage to the gold surface would be decreased due to the presence protein A layer . 
From these results , it can be concluded that the protein A layer thickness was not artiﬁcially increased due to an artifact from the experiment , but was more likely decreased meaning that the protein A layer thickness may be larger than what was measured and closer to the size of a single protein A molecule . 
While one could easily focus on the contact force applied by the tip , the key component in understanding these results as they related to both the binding energy of the proteins to the gold surface and the overall toughness of the substrate is the contact pressure applied by the tip . 
This is primarily due to the fact that the energy applied by the tip is proportional to the pressure which is a function of both the applied force and the contact area between the tip and the surface . 
Therefore , as one increases the force and decreases the contact area , one increases the pressure between the tip and the surface which provides greater energy to cleave physical and molecular bonds to the surface . 
The force applied by the AFM tip was obtained from Nanoscope Software ( Nanoscope version 6.13 , Copyright 2002 Digital ) and the pressure applied to the surface can be calculated by Hertz theory . 
Under a high force , for example , 10 -- 30 nN , the proteins are removed following the track of the AFM tip ( Wadu-Mesthrige et al. , 2001 ) . 
The applied force of the AFM tip and the pressure applied onto the gold surface are shown in Table I . 
The contact pressure P0 between the tip and the gold surface can be calculated by the Hertz theory ( Lu et al. , 2001 ) as 
Figure 4 . 
AFM image of several areas were increasing force was applied to the gold quartz surface with protein A and the corresponding section analysis . 
[ Color 
Figure 5 . 
Tapping mode AFM height image and corresponding section analysis of the gold quartz crystal subjected to an increasing imaging force in selected areas . 
1/4 3Fn 
P0 2pa2
( 1 ) 
Fn in this case is the normal contact force which is given by the following equation : where d is the penetration depth , E is the average Young 's modulus and R is the average radius which are given by the following : 
p 
fififififififi 
4E Rd3 Fn 1/4 3 
( 2 ) 
1 n22 ; E2 
1 n21 þ E1 
a2 
1 
d 1/4 ; R 1 1 1/4 þ R R1 
1/4 
E 1 
( 3 ) 
; R2 
E1 is the Young 's modulus of Silicon Nitride ( 310 Gpa ) , E2 the Young 's modulus of gold ( 79 Gpa ) , n1 the Poisson ratio of Silicon Nitride ( 0.27 ) , n2 is the Poisson ratio of gold ( 0.42 ) , and a is the radius of the contact area ( Accuratus , 2007 ; Howatson et al. , 1991 ; UtilizeGold , 2007 ) . 
R is the equivalent radius , and R1 and R2 are the radii of the particles in contact . 
However , since the gold surface has no curvature , the radius of curvature is effectively inﬁnite and therefore 1/R2 , where R2 is the radius of the gold , becomes zero . 
The maximum radius of contact mode tip is 60 nm and nominal tip radius is 20 nm . 
The pressure was calculated by using the nominal radius and is shown in Table I. 
In this experiment , the gold surface appeared to be damaged under an applied force greater than 77.4 nN as observed in Figure 5 . 
The resulting pressure of 3.95 GPa is well beyond the ultimate tensile strength ( UTS ) of Au , which is 100 MPa , and could conceivably damage the surface . 
Unfortunately , all of the pressures applied to the gold surface are an order of magnitude larger than the UTS of gold . 
As such , one must ask why deformation in the gold layer was only seen for the case of the two highest pressures . 
The calculated pressure applied to the gold surface may not be accurate due to the inconsistency in the radius of a contact mode tip and the size of contact area of the tip on the gold surface . 
Additionally , the spring constant used in determining the applied force is the nominal spring constant reported by the manufacturer which can vary by as much as 50 % from the actual value . 
Finally , the Young 's modulus values for bulk gold are used , but in this experiment , we are dealing with a thin gold ﬁlm of unknown thickness that may not have the exact same modulus as bulk gold . 
As shown previously , signiﬁcant step height changes were observed between the areas where the force was applied to the surface as compared to the other areas . 
The adsorbed protein A can be removed by a contact mode tip with on applied force between 3.9 and 32.1 nN to the sample surface . 
Therefore , this experiment not only shows that a protein A monolayer is adsorbed to the gold surface , but also that it is tightly bound to the gold layer , as would be expected from a highly stabilized system . 
A rigorous examination of the binding energy of protein A to a gold surface is beyond the scope of this paper , but such a study could be undertaken . 
To do so , one would need to speciﬁcally calibrate the spring constant of the cantilever tip which would allow for direct determination of the contact force . 
Several methods for determining the cantilever spring constant have been reported in literature ( Cleveland et al. , 1993 ; Cumpson and Hedley , 2003 ; Golovko et al. , 2007 ) . 
Additionally , one would need to determine the shape of the tip using SEM in order to determine both the tip radius and the radius of the contact area . 
Both of these would be required to obtain an accurate measure of the pressure applied to the surface , and hence , the energy required to remove the protein A molecules from the gold surface . 
Analysis of QCs With Attached Protein A and Anti-Salmonella Antibodies
Next , we investigated the mechanism by which antibodies attach to the protein A layer for use as a sensor platform . 
As shown in Figure 6 , there appears to be three distinct height levels observed on the sample . 
There is a base level with a moderate contrast , a lower level with a darker contrast that marks the pits scratched out by the AFM tip and a higher layer sitting on top of the base layer with a lighter contrast . 
If we assume the base layer is the protein A layer , then these lighter regions must be the areas where the section analysis ( a ) between the gold surface and the Protein A with antibody layer , ( b ) between the gold surface and the Protein A layer and ( c , d ) between the protein A and antibody layer . 
[ Color ﬁgure can be seen in the online version of this article , available at www.interscience.wiley.com . ] 
antibodies have adsorbed . 
Based on these observations , the antibodies appear to form islands on the protein layer , thereby only providing partial surface coverage . 
To understand this behavior , we must consider how the antibodies would initially seed and grow on the protein layer . 
When layer growth is initiated , a single antibody adsorbs on a random location on the protein A layer . 
Additional antibody adsorption should be more energetically favorable near the seed antibody as compared to adsorbing in another random location . 
Since nucleation is a random event , numerous sites will be seeded simultaneously across the protein A layer and begin to grow , resulting in multiple islands forming , as seen in Figure 6 . 
The island growth was affected by both the concentration of the antibodies in solution and exposure time over the protein A layer . 
To further quantify the extent of antibody adsorption , an identical series of experiments were performed as described in the previous section on the samples with both protein A and antibody layers . 
The step height difference over the protein only areas , as shown in Figure 6b , was approximately 
3.0 1.0 nm which is almost identical to the average step height difference of the sample with only the protein A coating , shown in Figure 4 . 
Moreover , the step height difference , shown in Figure 6a , where we believe the antibodies are adsorbed to the protein A layer was approximately 6.0 1.0 nm . 
In both cases , the layer thickness was determined using a procedure identical to that discussed previously for the protein A layer . 
A single protein A molecule is cylindrical in shape and the antibody has a Y shape . 
Ideally , a single antibody would be attached through the top of the cylindrical protein A molecule , as shown in Figure 7a . 
Realistically , the antibodies can attach to any available site on the protein A molecule ( Fig. 7b ) . 
This results in a step height difference of less than the full height of a single antibody molecule . 
The average step height difference between the protein A layer and the antibodies was approximately 3.0 1.0 nm . 
As this is well within the range of the expected partial length of the antibody , it can be concluded that the antibodies are attached to the protein A . 
The partial surface coverage of the protein A with the adsorbed antibodies is due to the random antibody attachment and the island growth mechanism explained earlier . 
We propose that antibodies attach to the protein A molecules in an `` island model '' which are available for interaction to the antigens . 
It is also known that the antibodies attach to the protein A using their Fc receptor ( Babacan et al. , 2000 ) and leaving the Fab receptor available for antigen interaction ( Babacan et al. , 2000 ) . 
Thus the model discovered in our report follow the well established model of protein A attachment with antibodies . 
Based on our observation of the island formation of the antibodies attached to the protein A , we wanted to test the availability of these antibodies to bind with speciﬁc antigens . 
As described in the methods sections , we used Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium and E. coli as the test antigens . 
Anti-Salmonella polyclonal antibodies were used for all of the attachment experiments . 
Various concentrations of Salmonella as well E. coli pure cultures were utilized and allowed to bind to the antibodies which were attached with protein A on the gold quartz crystal . 
The Salmonella attachment to the antibodies was analyzed by SEM imaging . 
As shown in the Figure 8a , Salmonella was attached to the protein A on the gold surface . 
On the other hand , E. coli cultures failed to attach to the prepared crystals ( data not shown ) . 
This demonstrates the speciﬁcity of the antiSalmonella antibodies which was also corroborated with antigen-antibody testing by ELISA ( data not shown ) and AFM imaging ( Fig. 8b ) . 
Our data shows that the methods described in this report can be used directly for detection of the QC whereas the remainder of the surface is relatively clear of the bacteria . 
[ Color ﬁgure can be seen in the online version of this article , available at www.interscience . 
wiley.com . ] 
bacterial pathogens such as Salmonella which are very common food borne pathogens . 
It should be noted that the Salmonella are not attached continuously across the surface . 
As can be seen in Figure 9 , the Salmonella tend to bunch up over speciﬁc areas ( highlighted by the box ) , leaving the remainder of the surface relatively free of Salmonella . 
Since the Salmonella should only bind strongly to the antibodies on the biosensor surface , a clustering of the Salmonella suggests that the antibodies are not adsorbed continuously across the surface . 
This further supports the idea that the antibodies are adsorbed onto the protein A layer in a series of discrete islands , as shown in Figure 6 , as opposed to a continuous ﬁlm . 
The roughness of the bare gold quartz surfaces and the adsorbed protein A and antibody layers were analyzed from the AFM images ( Data shown in Table II ) . 
After the gold surface is coated with the protein A and the antibody , signiﬁcant roughness changes were observed . 
Such changes have been used in previous experiments to indicate the deposition of a protein layer ( Kim et al. , 2004 ) and serves as additional evidence of the surface being coated with protein A and antibodies . 
Figure 7 . 
The ideal antibody attachment to protein A ( a ) , Our island model of antibody attachment to protein A ( b ) . 
Figure 6 . 
AFM image of areas where increasing forces were applied to the gold quartz crystal with attached protein A and antibodies and the corresponding 
Figure 9 . 
A 20 mm non-contact mode AFM image of a QC with attached protein A and Salmonella . 
The box highlights the clustering of the Salmonella on the surface of 
Figure 8 . 
SEM ( a ) and 10 mm non-contact mode AFM ( b ) images of QC attached with protein A and Salmonella . 
Salmonella are seen ( arrows ) attached to the crystals . 
Bar 1/4 5 mm in the SEM image . 
[ Color ﬁgure can be seen in the online version of this article , available at www.interscience.wiley.com . ] 
Table II . 
Roughness of the gold surface and the surface with attached protein A and antibodies . 
Sample 
Image Rms ( nm ) 
1.30 4.95 37.08 
Gold surface without coating Protein A Protein A and antibodies 
Figure 10 . 
The height images of the protein captured salt crystals and water before drying ( a ) , the phase image of the salt crystals clearly seen under the protein layer before drying ( b ) , The height images of the protein captured salt crystals and water after drying ( c ) , the phase image of the salt crystals clearly seen under the protein layer after 
drying ( d ) . 
[ Color ﬁgure can be seen in the online version of this article , available at www.interscience.wiley.com . ] 
Stability of Protein A Layer Attached to the QCs and the Resulting Biosensor System
During the course of performing various experiments , we observed that salt crystals were formed between the gold surface and the protein A layer in numerous places on all of the samples investigated . 
Figure 10 shows an example of the salt crystals that have been formed and captured . 
Similar salt crystal formation was observed in SEM imaging , as mentioned previously ( Fig. 3 ) . 
During the sample preparation process , the salt crystals might have been formed while the protein A layer is grown in the buffer solution . 
The salt crystals might be also generated after the quartz crystals are rinsed with PBS . 
It would be expected that the protein layer would cover the salt crystals tightly . 
However , when the height and phase images of the sample surface are taken by AFM , the protein A layer is much larger in area than salt crystals themselves , which suggest something like bubble formation has occurred , as shown in Figure 10a , b . 
This bubble formation may be occurring due to water entrapment under the protein layer . 
To determine if water is present in the protein layer , the sample was placed in an oven for 144 h at 1058C . 
After drying , the weight of the sample decreased by 0.3 mg 
( 0.1 mg ) . 
Moreover , by comparing the sample before and after drying , the salt crystals can be clearly observed in the AFM images and there is an obvious decrease in bubble size ( Fig. 10c , d ) . 
Therefore , it is concluded that both water and salt crystals are trapped under the protein layer during the adsorption process . 
QCM is an excellent method to conﬁrm the presence of adsorbed layers by measuring the mass difference . 
However , the identity of the adsorbed materials can not be determined by QCM alone . 
As shown here , extraneous salt crystals and water trapped under the layer can lead to unidentiﬁed mass build up which could potentially limit the overall sensitivity of the sensor . 
Additionally , the slow evaporation of the trapped water under the protein A layer will lead to slow changes in mass . 
This slow change in mass might affect the reusability of the biosensor crystals . 
However , this may not be an issue for the device which uses a disposable crystal or sensing device . 
Overall , the protein A and antibody adsorption onto the gold quartz crystal surface was conﬁrmed by both the tapping and contact mode AFM and SEM imaging . 
The adsorption of both molecules onto the gold quartz surface is one of the most important aspects for the accuracy and sensitivity of a biosensor . 
One of the important questions of this adsorption process is how well the proteins and antibodies are adsorbed on the surface . 
A related issue is how thick are the coatings on a surface and how consistent is the layer . 
Under these experimental conditions , the antibodies were partial coated on the protein A coated gold quartz surface . 
Additionally , salt crystals were attached to the gold quartz surface and water was trapped between the protein A layer and the gold quartz surface . 
These results might be due to the growth mechanism of protein A and antibody layers and other process variables , such as concentration of the protein A and antibody solutions , exposure time of the gold quartz surface , and the protocols for preparation of the samples . 
In most cases , maximizing the sensing surface exposed to the target samples would result in the optimum sensing conditions and maximum sensing performance . 
Partial or uneven adsorption of protein A and antibodies on the gold quartz crystal surface in addition to the trapped water and salt crystals might lead to limitations in the sensitivity of biosensors . 
The authors would like to thank the Electro-Optics Research Institute and Nanotechnology Center at the University of Louisville for use of the Atomic Force Microscope used in this work , Stacie Sturdivant for performing some of the attachment studies and Matt Cummins for performing some of the AFM imaging . 
The authors would also like to thank Dr. Mike Miller , Director of the Auburn University Genomics and Sequencing Laboratory for help with Scanning Electron Micro-scopy . 
Part of this work was supported from the NIH-MBRS grant 2S06 GM008219-200012 ( to SRS ) and the NSF CREST grant # 0734232 ( to SRS and SRP ) . 
Stacie Sturdivant was partly supported by NSF-HBCU-UP grant # 0505872 ( to SRS ) . 
Conclusions
In this report , the combination of tapping and contact mode AFM as well as SEM was used to investigate the characteristics of protein A and antibody attachment to a gold surface followed by recognition of speciﬁc antigens by the attached antibodies . 
The rms roughness of the base gold surface is 1.30 nm . 
The average step height change between the solid gold surface and protein A layer is approximately 3.0 1.0 nm . 
The average step height change between the gold surface coated with protein A and attached antibodies is approximately 6.0 1.0 nm . 
It is suggested that both the protein A and antibody are adsorbed as a single monolayer . 
We propose that antibodies attach to the protein A in an island model which may be affected by concentration and exposure time of the antibodies in solution . 
Formation of salt crystals during the preparation of crystals in buffer conditions and the presence of water under the protein A layer may have some limitation on sensor sensitivity . 
Future studies will focus on utilizing calibrated cantilevers for a more rigorous analysis of the binding energy between the various system components , that is , protein A to the gold surface and the protein A and antibody complex to the gold surface . 
Analysis of both of these parameters could be useful in further optimizing the design of protein A based biosensor . 
AFM is a powerful tool to investigate and characterize the surface morphology of the protein A layer and antibody attachment to gold quartz crystals in real time . 
In combination with other analysis methods such as SEM , protein A and antibody molecules attached on a gold quartz crystal can be studied . 
The combination of tapping and contact mode AFM can be utilized to investigate and verify the protein and antibody attachment onto sensor surfaces . 
Our studies add to the knowledge of preparation of a gold quartz crystal where antibodies are to be attached to protein A for speciﬁc detection of an antigen . 
The discovery of island model of antibody attachment should shed some light on sensor sensitivity and speciﬁcity and greatly contribute to the development of biosensor materials and platforms . 
References 
Accuratus . 
2007 . 
Silicon Nitride Si3N4 . 
http://www.accuratus.com/silinit . 
html . 
Babacan S , Pivarnik P , Letcher S , Rand AG . 
2000 . 
Evaluation of antibody immobilization methods for piezoelectric biosensor application . 
Bio-sens Bioelectron 15 ( 11 -- 12 ) :615 -- 621 . 
Chen FC , Godwin SL . 
2006 . 
Comparison of a rapid ATP bioluminescence assay and standard plate count methods for assessing microbial contamination of consumers ' refrigerators . 
J Food Prot 69 ( 10 ) :2534 -- 2538 . 
Chen Y , Cai J , Zhao T , Wang C , Dong S , Luo S , Chen ZW . 
2005 . 
Atomic force microscopy imaging and 3-D reconstructions of serial thin section of a single cell and its interior structure . 
Ultramicroscopy 103 ( 3 ) :173 -- 182 . 
Cleveland JP , Manne S , Bocek D , Hansma PK . 
1993 . 
A nondestructive method for determining the spring constant of cantilevers for scanning force microscopy . 
Rev Sci Instrum 64 ( 2 ) :403 -- 405 . 
Cumpson PJ , Hedley J. 2003 . 
Accurate analytical measurements in the atomic force microscope : A microfabricated spring constant standard potentially traceable to the SI . 
Nanotechnology 14 ( 12 ) :1279 -- 1288 . 
Davis KA , Leary TR . 
1989 . 
Continuous liquid-phase piezoelectric biosensor for kinetic immunoassays . 
Anal Chem 61 ( 11 ) :1227 -- 1230 . 
Golovko DS , Haschke T , Wiechert W , Bonaccurso E. 2007 . 
Nondestructive and noncontact method for determining the spring constant of rec-tangular cantilevers . 
Rev Sci Instrum 78 ( 4 ) :043705 -- 043706 . 
Hansma PK , Cleveland JP , Radmacher M , Walters DA , Hillner PE , Bezanilla M , Fritz M , Vie D , Hansma HG . 
1994 . 
Tapping mode atomic force microscopy in liquids . 
Appl Phys Lett 64 ( 13 ) :1738 -- 1740 . 
Horisberger M , Clerc MF . 
1985 . 
Labeling of colloidal gold with Protein A. Histochemistry 82 ( 3 ) :219 -- 223 . 
Howatson AM , Lund PG , Todd JD . 
1991 . 
Engineering tables and data . 
London : Chapman and Hall . 
182 p. Kanno S , Yanagida Y , Haruyama T , Kobatake E , Aizawa M. 1999 . 
Assembling of engineered IgG-binding protein on gold surface for highly oriented antibody immobilization . 
J Biotechnol 76 ( 2 -- 3 ) :207 -- 214 . 
Kim J , Yamasaki R , Park J , Jung H , Lee H , Kawai T. 2004 . 
Highly dense protein layers conﬁrmed by atomic force microscope and quartz crystal microbalance . 
J Biosci Bioeng 97 ( 2 ) :138 -- 140 . 
Kuhlmeier D , Rodda E , Kolarik LO , Furlong DN , Bilitewski U. 2003 . 
Application of atomic force microscopy and grating coupler for the characterization of biosensor surfaces . 
Biosens Bioelectron 18 ( 7 ) :925 -- 936 . 
Kumar S , Hoh JH . 
2001 . 
Probing the machinery of intercellular trafﬁcking with the atomic force microscope . 
Trafﬁc 2 ( 11 ) :746 -- 756 . 
Lee W , Oh BK , Bae YM , Park SH , Lee WH , Choi JW . 
2003 . 
Fabrication of self-assembled protein A monolayer and its application as an immu-nosensor . 
Biosens Bioelectron 19 ( 3 ) :185 -- 192 . 
Lu Z , Abdou M , Ying A. 2001 . 
3D micromechanical modeling of packed beds . 
J Nucl Mater 299 ( 2 ) :101 -- 110 . 
Pautsch A , Schulz GE . 
1998 . 
Structure of the outer membrane protein A transmembrane domain . 
Nat Struct Biol 5 ( 11 ) :1013 -- 1017 . 
UtilizeGold . 
2007 . 
Properties of Gold . 
http://www.utilisegold.com/ index.php?option 1/4 com_content & task 1/4 view & id 1/4 18 . 
Wadu-Mesthrige K , Amro NA , Garno JC , Xu S , Liu G. 2001 . 
Fabrication of nanometer-sized protein patterns using atomic force microscopy and selective immobilization . 
Biophys J 80 ( 4 ) :1891 -- 1899 . 
Wang H , Liu Y , Yang Y , Deng T , Shen G , Yu R. 2004 . 
A protein A-based orientation-controlled immobilization strategy for antibodies using nanometer-sized gold particles and plasma-polymerized ﬁlm . 
Anal Biochem 324 ( 2 ) :219 -- 226 . 
Whangbo MH , Magonov SN , Bengel H. 1997 . 
Tip-sample force interactions and surface stiffness in scanning probe microscopy . 
Probe Microscopy 1 ( 1 ) :23 -- 42 . 
Zhang Y , Fung Y , Sun H , Zhu D , Yao S. 2005 . 
Study of protein adsorption on polymer coatings surface by combining quartz crystal microbalance with electrochemical impedance methods . 
Sens Actuators B Chem 108 ( 1 -- 2 ) :933 -- 942 .