In vivo gene regulation in Salmonella spp. by a
Systems allowing tightly regulated expression of prokaryotic genes in vivo are important for performing functional studies of bacterial genes in host-pathogen interactions and establishing bacteria-based therapies . 
We integrated a regulatory control circuit activated by acetyl salicylic acid ( ASA ) in attenuated Salmonella enterica that carries an expression module with a gene of interest under control of the XylS2-dependent Pm promoter . 
This resulted in 20 -- 150-fold induction ex vivo . 
The regulatory circuit was also efﬁciently induced by ASA when the bacteria resided in eukaryotic cells , both in vitro and in vivo . 
To validate the circuit , we administered Salmonella spp. , carrying an expression module encoding the 5-ﬂuorocytosine -- converting enzyme cytosine deaminase in the bacterial chromosome or in a plasmid , to mice with tumors . 
Induction with ASA before 5-ﬂuorocytosine administration resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction of tumor growth . 
These results demonstrate the usefulness of the regulatory control circuit to selectively switch on gene expression during bacterial infection . 
Development of systems that allow controlled expression of hetero-logous genes is critical for the study of gene function . 
These systems would open new perspectives in the functional analysis of hostpathogen interactions , allowing assessment of the importance of speciﬁc virulence genes during the infection process . 
They would also facilitate the exploitation of recombinant microorganisms for targeted expression of therapeutic molecules . 
Therefore , effort has been invested in the development of expression systems that allow tightly regulated expression of prokaryotic genes under in vitro and in vivo conditions1 -- 3 . 
Previous expression systems have relied on the use of inducers or on the alteration of environmental conditions . 
These approaches , however , are not suitable for activation in eukaryotic cells . 
Promoters derived from virulence genes have permitted the generation of expression systems activated upon bacterial infection4 ,5 . 
These systems , however , are either silent ( extracellularly ) or activated ( within eukaryotic cells ) , preventing gene expression at will during speciﬁc stages of the infection process1 ,3,6 . 
Thus , expression systems have been developed that could be activated in response to external stimuli such as tetracycline , mitomycin or X-rays , even within eukaryotic cells2 ,7 -- 9 . 
Unfortunately , these improved systems are suboptimal , as their implementation is barely compatible with in vivo studies because of sub-optimal pharmacokinetics and toxicity of the inducer . 
Additionally , an ideal system should have negligible basal expression ( minimal metabolic burden ) and high induction ratio ( critical for genes encoding toxic products ) . 
Furthermore , none of the existing inducers can breach all biological barriers , reaching bacteria within the endocytic compartment without side effects . 
Thus , the implementation of a regulatory system permitting tight in situ control of bacterial gene expression during microbial transit across different niches during infection is still an elusive target . 
ASA is one of the most widely used and best-characterized analgesic and anti-inﬂammatory drugs on the market10 . 
The biological half-life of ASA is only 20 min , as it is rapidly converted into salicylic acid , which has a half-life of 2 -- 4 h . 
An extensive body of clinical and experimental evidence describes the pharmacological properties of ASA11 ,12 . 
Salicylate-responsive regulatory factors control the naphthalene degradative pathway in Pseudomo-nas putida . 
The regulatory protein NahR and its target promoters Psal or Pnah have been used to express heterologous genes13 ,14 . 
The nahR-Psal regulatory system is tightly regulated ( 20 -- 100-fold induction ) in response to the natural inducer salicylate15 ,16 . 
Regulatory systems induced by aromatic compounds can also be activated by ASA , such as the mutant xylS2 regulator of the meta-operon in the toluene-xylene catabolic pathway of P. putida13 . 
The regulatory capacity of these systems could be ampliﬁed 7 -- 20-fold by using a regulatory cascade , in which the regulators ( NahR and XylS2 ) are simultaneously activated by salicylate or ASA13 ,16 . 
Here we implemented and validated an in vivo ASA or salicylate-inducible cascade expression system based on a regulatory circuit integrated into the chromosome of an attenuated Salmonella enterica aroA ( SL7207-4S2 strain ) . 
This allows tightly regulated in vivo expression of the target gene after bacterial infection in response to salicylate . 
In vitro characterization studies revealed induction ratios of 20 -- 150-fold . 
S. enterica can replicate within solid tumors when delivered systemically , and this has previously been exploited for the delivery of therapeutic genes in humans9 ,17 -- 21 . 
Thus , we validated our system in vivo in mice challenged with a ﬁbrosarcoma . 
We administered S. enterica carrying an expression module encoding the 5-ﬂuorocytosine -- converting enzyme cytosine deaminase to mice bearing tumors . 
ASA induction before treatment with 5-ﬂuorocytosine resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction ( P o 0.01 ) in tumor growth in comparison to controls and mice receiving bacteria in which cytosine deaminase expression was controlled by a tetracycline-inducible system . 
These results demonstrate the potential of this approach to achieve tightly regulated expression of prokaryotic genes in vivo . 
We expect that this method will facilitate functional studies to elucidate the role of bacterial genes during different phases of the infection process as well as the implementation of bacteria-based therapies . 
RESULTS Regulated Salmonella spp . 
gene expression in culture medium 
We integrated the regulatory circuit for the salicylate-inducible cascade expression system ( Active Motif ; Fig. 1a ) into the chromosome of an attenuated S. enterica aroA ( SL7207-4S2 strain ; see Supplementary Table 1 online for a list of all strains , plasmids and cell lines used in this work ) . 
We introduced a target gene ( lacZ ) under the control of the Pm promoter using an expression plasmid . 
When we used either ASA or salicylate to activate the cascade ampliﬁcation circuit ( Fig. 1a ) , we observed a dose-dependent expression of b-galactosidase in clones carrying the lacZ expression vector ( Fig. 1b ) . 
Using a low-copy-number plasmid expressing lacZ ( pMPO13 ) resulted in 20-fold lower basal expression levels than using a high-copy-number plasmid ( pMPO2 ; 204 versus 4,384 
Miller units ) . 
After induction with 2 mM salicylate , however , the synergistic ampliﬁcation effect of the regulatory circuit integrated into the chromosome resulted in much higher and similar enzymatic activities using both vectors ( 36,792 versus 66,185 Miller units , respectively ; Fig. 1c ) . 
We obtained a tenfold higher induction rate in clones containing pMPO13 compared to those carrying pMPO2 ( 180 versus 15 Miller units ; Fig. 1d ) , thereby suggesting that pMPO13 is the most promising vector for validating the regulatory circuit . 
ASA and salicylate induced gene expression in infected cells
To test the performance of the regulatory circuit when S. enterica reside in the intracellular compartment of mammalian cells , we infected HeLa cells with S. enterica carrying pMPO2 or pMPO13 . 
We detected basal expression only in cells infected with bacteria carrying pMPO2 ( Supplementary Fig. 1 online ) . 
In contrast , we observed similar b-galactosidase expression in HeLa cells infected with bacteria bearing pMPO2 or pMPO13 after induction ( see Supplementary Fig. 1 ) . 
We observed no differences in protein expression when we used ASA or salicylate as inducers , thereby conﬁrming that both compounds reached intracellular bacteria . 
We obtained comparable results using the macrophage-like cell line 
J774.A1 (data not shown). These results suggested that the inducer contrast, 71% of cells can exert its activity on intracellular bacteria, and that the low-copy- tary Fig. 2 online). number vector was the more appropriate for subsequent studies.
Regulated Salmonella spp. gene expression in infected mice
In preliminary studies we evaluated expression of the reporter gene within the cell line to be used for induction of tumors in mice . 
We infected F1.A11 cells , which derive from a spontaneous murine ﬁbrosarcoma , with an SL7207-4S2 derivative carrying a plasmid that encodes gfp , pMPO15 , that was derived by replacement of Pm-lacZ in pMPO13 with Pm-gfp ( Supplementary Table 1 ) . 
After 4 h induction with 2 mM salicylate , ﬂuorescence microscopy revealed GFP-expressing bacteria in tumor cells ( Fig. 2a ) . 
Flow cytometry analysis inidcated that 30 % of the eukaryotic cells were 
To evaluate whether the regulatory control circuit can be exploited to achieve tightly regulated in situ expression , we challenged mice with the cell line F1.A11 ( Fig. 3a ) . 
When the F1.A11-derived tumors were palpable ( 1 -- 1.5 mm in diameter ; approximately 0.1 -- 0.2 g ) , we administered 106 c.f.u. of the strain SL7207-4S2 carrying the gfp encoding plasmid pMPO15 intraperitoneally . 
After 4 days , we divided mice into two groups , which we injected with salicylate either intraperitoneally or intravenously . 
Four hours after induction we killed the mice , excised tumors and lymphoid organs , and prepared and plated cellular suspensions to determine the number of c.f.u. / g of tissue . 
As expected , bacteria were enriched within tumors ( an average of 3 106 , 2 106 and 1 108 c.f.u. / g in spleen , liver and tumors , respectively ) . 
We then analyzed tumor cells by ﬂow cytometry to evaluate the presence of GFP-expressing bacteria . 
Approximately 39 and 48 % of the tumor cells were GFP-positive after induction with salicylate by intraperitoneal and intravenous route , respectively ( Fig. 3b , c ) . 
In contrast , only 11 % of the F1.A11 cells from noninduced controls contained GFP ( Fig. 3 ) . 
We did not observe GFP-positive cells in tumors in samples from mice that received S. enterica carrying the empty vector ( data not shown ) . 
Expression of a prodrug-converting enzyme in tumor cells
Mammalian cells are resistant to 5-ﬂuorocytosine because they lack cytosine deaminase , an enzyme that converts 5-ﬂuorocytosine into 5-ﬂuorouracil , a cytotoxic compound routinely used in cancer chemotherapy . 
We evaluated the capacity of the new system to selectively deliver a prodrug-converting enzyme into solid tumors in vivo . 
Thus we compared the effect on tumor growth of infecting S. enterica carrying vectors with the Escherichia coli cytosine deaminase -- encoding gene codA under the control of either the salicylate-inducible circuit ( pMPO16 ; Supplementary Table 1 ) or the tetR-tetO promoter and operator ( pMPO17 ; Supplementary Table 1 ) . 
When tumors were palpable , we intraperitoneally admi-nistered SL7207-4S2 carrying either pMPO16 or pMPO17 ( 106 c.f.u. ) . 
After 5 days , we induced cytosine deaminase expression by a single intraperitoneal injection of salicylate or tetracycline ( Fig. 4a ) , and initiated 5-ﬂuorocytosine therapy 4 h after induction . 
We observed similar tumor growth in mice receiving S. enterica in combination with 5-ﬂuorocytosine or phosphatebuffered saline ( PBS ; Fig. 4b ) . 
We detected slower tumor progression in mice treated with 5-ﬂuorocytosine that were injected with SL7207-4S2 carrying pMPO17 , wherein codA expression was induced by tetracycline ( Fig. 4b ) . 
The differences , however , were not statistically signiﬁcant with respect to controls ( P 4 0.05 ) . 
In contrast , the size of the tumors from 5-ﬂuorocytosine -- treated mice receiving SL7207-4S2 carrying pMPO16 , wherein cytosine deaminase expression was induced by salicylate , was signiﬁcantly smaller than in controls ( P o 0.01 ; Fig. 4b -- d ) . 
These results provide the proof of concept for the usefulness of the regulatory circuit to control prokaryotic gene expression in vivo . 
Broad implementation of this platform , however , might require stabilization of the expression module . 
Thus , we evaluated the performance of strains in which the expression module was integrated into the chromosome . 
Tumor size in 5-ﬂuorocytosine -- treated mice receiving bacteria expressing codA from the chromosome ( SL7207-4S2-MPO27 ; Supplementary Table 1 ) was similar to that observed in mice receiving the strain carrying the expression module in a plasmid ( SL7207-4S2 with pMPO16 ) , but only after induction ( Fig. 4e ) . 
In contrast , tumors in mice injected with PBS or with a control strain , where the expression module without codA was integrated ( SL7207-4S2-MPO28 ; Supplementary Table 1 ) , were signiﬁcantly larger ( P o 0.05 ; Fig. 4e ) . 
DISCUSSION
The availability of genomic information from bacterial pathogens now permits essential in vivo functional studies on putative virulence genes . 
This work can be addressed more efﬁciently by using tightly regulated expression systems . 
These will allow assessment of the role of speciﬁc genes at different stages of the infection process . 
Presently available systems , however , are suboptimal for in vivo studies . 
The main aim of this work was to validate a system to obtain tightly regulated expression of prokaryotic genes in vivo based on inducers exhibiting an adequate pharmacokinetic and safety proﬁle . 
Our strategy allows a tightly regulated expression of selected genes under the control of the Pm promoter in vivo , and presence of the inducers led to activation of protein expression regardless of the topology ( intracellular or extracellular ) . 
This suggests that the eukaryotic environment does not interfere with gene expression , despite considerable differences in growth conditions . 
We observed similar expression levels in S. enterica carrying low ( pMPO13 ) and high-copy-number ( pMPO2 ) vectors . 
Although the background expression was 20-fold lower using the low-copy-number vector , more than 50 % of the maximal reporter expression was reached after induction . 
As genetic constructs in low-copy-number vectors are more stable in vivo , even without selective pressure6 ,22,23 , they seem to be the vectors of choice for in vivo studies when monocopy gene dosage is not feasible or not required . 
The developed approach is extremely ﬂexible , as it is possible to integrate additional expression cassettes under control of Pm without titrating out its activator XylS2 , which is overexpressed by the upstream regulator nahR-Psal . 
The choice of salicylate as inducer of the regulatory cascade was based on its rapid absorption , broad biological distribution in different tissues , short half-life as well as the lack of toxicity when administered at therapeutic dosages compatible with cascade induction , which would allow transient expression for B 9 h after induction . 
Additional advantages of the system are the minimized metabolic burden resulting from a tight regulation and the high induction levels , which also allow using monocopy gene dosage16 . 
In addition to its application in the study of host-pathogen interactions , this approach can be exploited for biomedical interventions in which bacterial vectors are used for expression of heterologous antigens or the targeted delivery of anticancer agents21 ,24 -- 26 , as the number of viable S. enterica start to decline in spleen 4 d after infection to nondetectable levels around day 20 ( refs . 
6,22 ) . 
Thus , we evaluated whether the regulatory control circuit can be exploited to deliver the 5-ﬂuorocytosine -- converting enzyme cytosine deaminase in tumor cells in vivo . 
Upon induction with salicylate there was a signiﬁcant reduction in tumor progression in mice treated with strains carrying the expression module either in a plasmid or integrated into the chromosome with respect to controls and mice receiving S. enterica in which cytosine deaminase expression was controlled by a tetracycline-inducible system . 
Although S. enterica gene expression in cell cultures strongly depends on the host cell type27 , suggesting that gene expression in host tissues might be difﬁcult to predict , our data showed that recombinant S. enterica bearing the nahR : : Psal/xylS2 module displayed high induction rates within macrophages , epithelial cells and tumor cells . 
None of the other systems that had been proposed to control S. enterica gene expression in situ can be compared with the salicylate-dependent regulatory circuit in terms of efﬁciency , ﬂexibility and safety . 
Thus , our regulatory control circuit may constitute a cornerstone for functional studies of bacteria-host interactions during the infection process , as well as for the establishment of novel therapeutic interventions . 
METHODS
In vitro characterization of clones bearing the expression circuit . 
We induced with either sodium salicylate or ASA ( Sigma ) SL7207-4S2 derivatives carrying b-galactosidase -- or GFP-encoding vectors grown in LB broth at 37 1C to an optical density at 600 nm ( OD600 ) of 0.3 . 
After 4 and 6 h , we evaluated the production of b-galactosidase by determining the number of Miller units28 . 
In vitro infection and intracellular expression studies . 
We grew bacteria at 37 1C in LB broth supplemented with 0.3 M sodium chloride and 100 mg/ml ampicillin . 
We grew HeLa and J774.A1 cells on coverslips placed in 24-well tissue culture plates ( Nunc ) in Dulbeccós modiﬁed Eagle 's medium ( DMEM ; Gibco BRL ) supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine and 10 % FCS at 37 1C until they reached 60 -- 80 % conﬂuence . 
We added 106 c.f.u. to each well , and incubated cells for an additional 1 or 2 h for J774A .1 and HeLa cells , respectively . 
We then washed cells , added fresh DMEM supplemented with 50 mg/ml of gentamicin to kill extracellular bacteria , and induced gene expression with sodium salicylate or ASA ( 2 mM ) . 
After a 4-h incubation , we washed , ﬁxed ( 2 % paraformaldehyde ) and stained with a b-galactosidase staining kit ( Roche ) cells infected with the lacZ vector -- containing S. enterica . 
To evaluate GFP expression in the intracellular compartment of F1.A11 cells , we induced cells as described above and analyzed them by ﬂuorescence microscopy . 
For quantiﬁcation , we detached infected cells with trypsin and analyzed them by ﬂow cytometry using a FACScalibur cytometer and the CellquestPro software ( Becton-Dickinson ) . 
In vivo analysis of clones bearing the regulatory circuit . 
We intraperitoneally injected mice with 106 c.f.u. of SL7207-4S2 ( pMPO15 ) . 
After 30 min , we injected 150 ml of sodium salicylate ( 100 mM ) intraperitoneally or intravenously , which is compatible with accepted ASA dosages12 . 
After 4 h , we killed the mice and analyzed single-cell suspensions obtained from spleens , mesenteric lymph nodes and peritoneal lavages , for the presence of GFP-positive cells by ﬂow cytometry . 
Animals were treated in accordance with local and European Community guidelines . 
To evaluate activation of the regulatory circuit within tumors , mice received a subcutaneous injection into the right ﬂank with 5 104 cells from a spontaneous murine ﬁbrosarcoma ( F1.A11 m cells ) resuspended in 100 l of PBS . 
When palpable tumors developed , we intraperitoneally injected mice with 106 c.f.u. of SL7207-4S2 ( pMPO15 ) . 
Five days after infection , we induced the expression of gfp , as described above . 
After 4 h , we killed the mice and removed tumors , spleens and livers for ﬂow cytometric analysis and determination of bacterial viable counts . 
In vivo comparison of salicylate or tetracycline inducible systems . 
Mice were challenged with F1.A11 cells , as described above . 
When tumors were palpable , mice intraperitoneally received 106 c.f.u. of SL7207-4S2 carrying codA under control of the salicylate-responsive regulatory circuit ( pMPO16 ) or the tetR-tetO promoter-operator ( pMPO17 ) , as well as derivatives in which the expression module and control modules were integrated into the chromosome ( SL7207-4S2-MPO27 and SL7207-4S2-MPO28 ) . 
6 Control mice received PBS or 10 c.f.u. of plasmid-less SL7207-4S2 . 
After 5 d , we induced expression of codA by intraperitoneal injection of salicylate or tetracycline ( 100 mg ) . 
Four hours later , we initiated 5-ﬂuorocytosine therapy ( 300 mg/kg every 12 h ) . 
We measured tumor growth using calipers at the narrowest and longest surface lengths . 
We calculated tumor size as the product of the mean of these two lengths per mouse averaged over the total number of mice per group ( n 1/4 6 ) . 
We calculated stati-stical differences in tumor size using the Student 's t-test . 
We euthanized mice when tumors were 10 mm long to avoid unnecessary suffering . 
Additional methods . 
Strains , plasmids and cell lines are described in Supplementary Table 1 . 
We also provide full description of the integration of the regulatory module nahR/Psal : : xylS2 and the codA expression module into the S. enterica chromosome in Supplementary Methods online . 
Note: Supplementary information is available on the Nature Methods website.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.L.R. and P.D.B. performed most of the experimental work and analysis of data , and contributed to experimental design . 
E.M.C. mapped the insertion of the regulatory module and constructed the strains bearing the expression module integrated into the aroC locus . 
A.C. initially designed the cascade expression system for use in eukaryotic cells . 
C.L. contributed to the in vivo work . 
E.S. and C.A.G. were responsible for experimental design , participated in the analysis of raw data and wrote the paper . 
COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT
The authors declare competing ﬁnancial interests : details accompany the full-text HTML version of the paper at http://www.nature.com/naturemethods/ . 
Published online at http://www.nature.com/naturemethods Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions
1 . 
Hohmann , E.L. , Oletta , C.A. , Loomis , W.P. & Miller , S.I. Macrophage-inducible expression of a model antigen in Salmonella typhimurium enhances immunogenicity . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 92 , 2904 -- 2908 ( 1995 ) . 
2 . 
McKinney , J. , Guerrier-Takada , C. , Galan , J. & Altman , S. Tightly regulated gene expression system in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
184 , 6056 -- 6059 ( 2002 ) . 
3 . 
Bumann , D. Regulated antigen expression in live recombinant Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium strongly affects colonization capabilities and speciﬁc CD4 ( + ) - T-cell responses . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
69 , 7493 -- 7500 ( 2001 ) . 
4 . 
Ward , S.J. , Douce , G. , Figueiredo , D. , Dougan , G. & Wren , B.W. Immunogenicity of a Salmonella typhimurium aroA aroD vaccine expressing a nontoxic domain of Clostridium difﬁcile toxin A. Infect . 
Immun . 
67 , 2145 -- 2152 ( 1999 ) . 
5 . 
Huang , Y. , Hajishengallis , G. & Michalek , S.M. Construction and characterization of a Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium clone expressing a salivary adhesin of Streptococcus mutans under control of the anaerobically inducible nirB promoter . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
68 , 1549 -- 1556 ( 2000 ) . 
6 . 
Medina , E. , Paglia , P. , Rohde , M. , Colombo , M.P. & Guzman , C.A. Modulation of host immune responses stimulated by Salmonella vaccine carrier strains by using different promoters to drive the expression of the recombinant antigen . 
Eur . 
J. Immunol . 
30 , 768 -- 777 ( 2000 ) . 
7 . 
Bateman , B.T. , Donegan , N.P. , Jarry , T.M. , Palma , M. & Cheung , A.L. Evaluation of a tetracycline-inducible promoter in Staphylococcus aureus in vitro and in vivo and its application in demonstrating the role of sigB in microcolony formation . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
69 , 7851 -- 7857 ( 2001 ) . 
8 . 
Qian , F. & Pan , W. Construction of a tetR-integrated Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi CVD908 strain that tightly controls expression of the major merozoite surface protein of Plasmodium falciparum for applications in human vaccine production . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
70 , 2029 -- 2038 ( 2002 ) . 
9 . 
Pawelek , J.M. , Low , K.B. & Bermudes , D. Bacteria as tumour-targeting vectors . 
Lancet Oncol . 
4 , 548 -- 556 ( 2003 ) . 
10 . 
Weissmann , G. Aspirin . 
Sci . 
Am . 
264 , 84 -- 90 ( 1991 ) . 
11 . 
Hennekens , C.H. Update on aspirin in the treatment and prevention of cardiovascular disease . 
Am . 
J. Manag . 
Care 8 , S691 -- S700 ( 2002 ) . 
12 . 
Yin , M.J. , Yamamoto , Y. & Gaynor , R.B. . 
The anti-inﬂammatory agents aspirin and salicylate inhibit the activity of I ( kappa ) B kinase-beta . 
Nature 396 , 77 -- 80 ( 1998 ) . 
13 . 
Cebolla , A. , Sousa , C. & de Lorenzo , V. Rational design of a bacterial transcriptional cascade for amplifying gene expression capacity . 
Nucleic Acids Res . 
29 , 759 -- 766 ( 2001 ) . 
14 . 
Suarez , A. et al. . 
Stable expression of pertussis toxin in Bordetella bronchiseptica under the control of a tightly regulated promoter . 
Appl . 
Environ . 
Microbiol . 
63 , 122 -- 127 ( 1997 ) . 
15 . 
Cebolla , A. , Sousa , C. & de Lorenzo , V. Effector speciﬁcity mutants of the transcriptional activator NahR of naphthalene degrading Pseudomonas deﬁne protein sites involved in binding of aromatic inducers . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
272 , 3986 -- 3992 ( 1997 ) . 
16 . 
Cebolla , A. , Royo , J.L. , De Lorenzo , V. & Santero , E. Improvement of recombinant protein yield by a combination of transcriptional ampliﬁcation and stabilization of gene expression . 
Appl . 
Environ . 
Microbiol . 
68 , 5034 -- 5041 ( 2002 ) . 
17 . 
Clairmont , C. et al. . 
Biodistribution and genetic stability of the novel antitumor agent VNP20009 , a genetically modiﬁed strain of Salmonella typhimurium . 
J. Infect . 
Dis . 
181 , 1996 -- 2002 ( 2000 ) . 
18 . 
Yu , Y.A. et al. . 
Visualization of tumors and metastases in live animals with bacteria and vaccinia virus encoding light-emitting proteins . 
Nat . 
Biotechnol . 
22 , 313 -- 320 ( 2004 ) . 
19 . 
Low , K.B. et al. . 
Lipid A mutant Salmonella with suppressed virulence and TNFa induction retain tumor-targeting in vivo . 
Nat . 
Biotechnol . 
17 , 37 -- 41 ( 1999 ) . 
20 . 
Wei , M.Q. et al. . 
Facultative or obligate anaerobic bacteria have the potential for multimodality therapy of solid tumours . 
Eur . 
J. Cancer 43 , 490 -- 496 ( 2007 ) . 
21 . 
Toso , J.F. et al. . 
Phase I study of the intravenous administration of attenuated Salmonella typhimurium to patients with metastatic melanoma . 
J. Clin . 
Oncol . 
20 , 142 -- 152 ( 2002 ) . 
22 . 
Medina , E. et al. . 
Pathogenicity island 2 mutants of Salmonella typhimurium are efﬁcient carriers for heterologous antigens and enable modulation of immune responses . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
67 , 1093 -- 1099 ( 1999 ) . 
23 . 
Tzschaschel , B.D. , Guzman , C.A. , Timmis , K.N. & de Lorenzo , V . 
An Escherichia coli hemolysin transport system-based vector for the export of polypeptides : export of Shiga-like toxin IIeB subunit by Salmonella typhimurium aroA . 
Nat . 
Biotechnol . 
14 , 765 -- 769 ( 1996 ) . 
24 . 
Medina , E. , Guzman , C.A. , Staendner , L.H. , Colombo , M.P. & Paglia , P. Salmonella vaccine carrier strains : effective delivery system to trigger anti-tumor immunity by oral route . 
Eur . 
J. Immunol . 
29 , 693 -- 699 ( 1999 ) . 
25 . 
Pawelek , J.M. , Low , K.B. & Bermudes , D. Tumor-targeted Salmonella as a novel anticancer vector . 
Cancer Res . 
57 , 4537 -- 4544 ( 1997 ) . 
26 . 
Nemunaitis , J. et al. . 
Pilot trial of genetically modiﬁed , attenuated Salmonella expressing the E. coli cytosine deaminase gene in refractory cancer patients . 
Cancer Gene Ther . 
10 , 737 -- 744 ( 2003 ) . 
27 . 
Burns-Keliher , L. , Nickerson , C.A. , Morrow , B.J. & Curtiss , R. , III . 
Cell-speciﬁc proteins synthesized by Salmonella typhimurium . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
66 , 856 -- 861 ( 1998 ) . 
28 . 
Miller , J.H. Experiments in molecular genetics . 
( Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Harbor , New York , 1972 ) .