Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 
( 2007 ) 220 -- 224 
Journal of Microbiological Methods 71 
www.elsevier.com/locate/jmicmeth 
FACS-isolation of Salmonella-infected cells with defined bacterial load from mouse spleen
Friederike Thöne a , Björn Schwanhäusser b , Daniel Becker b , Matthias Ballmaier c , Dirk Bumann a , b , d , 
a 
Hannover Medical School , Junior Research Group `` Mucosal Infections '' OE 9421 , Carl-Neuberg-Str . 
1 , D-30625 Hannover , Germany b Max-Planck-Institute for Infection Biology , Dept. Molecular Biology , Charitéplatz 1 , D-10117 Berlin , Germany c Hannover Medical School , Core Facility Flow Cytometry , Carl-Neuberg-Str . 
1 , D-30625 Hannover , Germany d University of Basel , Biozentrum , Focal Area Infection Biology , Klingelbergstrasse 70 , 4056 Basel , Switzerland 
Received 15 May 2007 ; received in revised form 22 August 2007 ; accepted 30 August 2007 Available online 11 September 2007 
Abstract 
Salmonella can cause a typhoid fever like disease in genetically susceptible mice . 
In contrast to in vitro cell culture models , most host cells in infected tissues contain only one or two Salmonella , but a small subpopulation of infected host cells contains many Salmonella . 
It has been proposed that these various subpopulations have differential relevance during infection but to test this , methods for isolating such Salmonella will be required . 
We developed a method to purify differentially infected host cells by flow cytometry using Salmonella expressing the green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) . 
Critical parameters for this method were sufficient GFP expression to detect infected cells against strong host cell autofluorescence , and low variation in GFP content of individual Salmonella . 
We evaluated more than hundred different GFP-constructs but only one single-copy chromosomal PsifB -- gfp fusion met these criteria and enabled differentiation of weakly and highly infected cells based on total GFP fluorescence . 
Confocal microscopy of sorted cells confirmed the successful separation of these subpopulations . 
In addition to isolation of infected cells , our method also enabled enumeration of the subpopulations and phenotypic characterization by staining with antibodies to surface markers . 
Surprisingly , a small subpopulation of highly infected host cells contained the majority of Salmonella but based on MHC II and ICAM I expression , this subpopulation was not more strongly activated than weakly infected cells . 
Our method will facilitate future characterization of the different subpopulations and the identification of bacterial and host factors that control Salmonella load and proliferation in vivo . 
© 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved . 
Keywords: Flow cytometry; Salmonella; Green flourescent protein
1. Introduction
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium causes a systemic disease in genetically susceptible mice that mimics important aspects of human typhoid fever ( Santos et al. , 2001 ) . 
In infected tissues most Salmonella reside in macrophages ( Salcedo et al. , 2001 ) . 
Interestingly , confocal microscopy of infected liver sec ¬ 
Corresponding author . 
University of Basel , Biozentrum , Focal Area Infection Biology , Klingelbergstrasse 70 , 4056 Basel , Switzerland . 
Tel. : +41 61 267 23 82 ; fax : +41 61 267 21 18 . 
E-mail address : Dirk.Bumann@unibas.ch ( D. Bumann ) . 
tions revealed that most infected macrophages contain only one or two Salmonella , while highly infected cells that are commonly observed in in vitro cell culture infection models are actually rather rare in vivo ( Sheppard et al. , 2003 ) . 
Because of their large number , infected host cells containing one or two Salmonella have been proposed to be most relevant for the infection process , but the significance of the few highly infected host cells remained unclear ( Sheppard et al. , 2003 ) . 
The distribution of differentially infected host cells has been successfully reproduced by modeling ( Brown et al. , 2006 ) but experimental analysis of the relevance of the various subpopulations is still missing . 
To compare the infectivity and other properties of host cells and Salmonella in weakly vs. highly infected cells , a method to purify these subpopulations would b required . 
Sections are highly useful to determine bacterial loads in host cells , and might permit isolation of Salmonella from defined host cells by Laser Capture Microdissection , but both Salmonella and the host cells are unlikely to preserve their in vivo properties during tissue preparation , sectioning , and micro-scopy . 
In contrast , Salmonella expressing the green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) during infection can be used to identify infected host cells and to rapidly isolate them from tissue homogenates using flow cytometry ( Salcedo et al. , 2001 ; Yrlid and Wick , 2001 ) . 
In fact , we have recently been able to used similar techniques to isolate Salmonella from infected tissues in sufficient purity and yield for large-scale analysis ( Becker et al. , 2006 ) . 
0167-7012 / $ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved . 
doi :10.1016 / j.mimet .2007.08.016 
Fig. 1 . 
Flow cytometric detection of individual Salmonella ( A ) and Salmonella-infected host cells ( B ) in mouse spleen homogenates using an unsuitable GFP-expression construct . 
Mice were infected with Salmonella carrying a plasmid-encoded PugtL -- gfp_ova fusion ( Rollenhagen et al. , 2004 ) . 
Three days later , spleen homogenates were analyzed by uncompensated two-color flow cytometry ( Bumann , 2002 ) . 
To detect individual Salmonella , samples were treated with the detergent Tx100 that selectively lyses host cells ( A ) . 
Fluorescent particles were gated for bacterial ( A ) or host cell ( B ) scatter properties . 
Autofluorescent host cell fragments ( A ) or host cells ( B ) could be spectrally separated based on their high orange fluorescence component ( shaded areas in A and B ) . 
C ) Histograms of GFP-fluorescence of individual Salmonella ( grey area ) and infected cells ( black line ) revealed a large variation in GFP-content of individual Salmonella preventing a meaningful analysis of Salmonella load in infected cells based on GFP-fluorescence . 
Fig. 2 . 
Detection and sorting of differentially infected cells using a suitable GFP-Salmonella strain carrying a chromosomal PsifB -- gfp fusion ( Rollenhagen et al. , 2004 ) . 
A ) Detection of individual Salmonella in Tx100-treated spleen homogenates ( for further explanation see legend to Fig. 1 . ) . 
B ) Detection of infected host cells ( no Tx100-treatment ) . 
C ) Histograms of GFP-fluorescence for individual Salmonella ( grey area ) and infected host cells ( black line ) . 
The narrow GFP distribution in individual Salmonella enabled clear separation of weakly and highly infected host cells . 
Cells with GFP fluorescence equivalent to 1 , 2 , 3 -- 4 , or more than 4 Salmonella were sorted using the indicated gates . 
D ) Confocal microscopy of host cells sorted according to gates shown in C ) . 
E ) Number of Salmonella associated with sorted infected cells as determined by confocal microscopy . 
The lines represent geometric means . 
There was a close agreement between direct count and Salmonella loads estimated from the total GFP fluorescence . 
However , it was still unclear if flow cytometry would have sufficient resolution to separate infected host cell subpopulations containing differential number of Salmonella . 
In this study , we showed that typical GFP-expressing Sal-monella strains were mostly unsuitable for this purpose , but one particular construct expressed GFP in sufficient quantity and homogeneity to identify host cells with differential Salmonella content . 
With this construct , we could develop methods to enumerate , characterize , and isolate infected host cell subpopulations . 
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Bacterial strains, cultivation, and mouse infections
Salmonella strains used in this study were derivatives of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium SL1344 hisG rpsL xyl ( Hoiseth and Stocker , 1981 ) . 
Strains carrying plasmid-encoded or chromosomally-encoded promoter-gfp fusions were previously described ( Bumann , 2002 ; Rollenhagen et al. , 2004 ; Rollenhagen and Bumann , 2006 ) . 
Salmonella strains were grown in Lennox LB medium containing 90 μg ml − 1 streptomycin . 
When appropriate , 100 μg ml − 1 ampicillin or 30 μg ml − 1 kanamycin was added . 
For systemic infection , Salmonella were grown in LB to late log phase ( ca. 1 × 109 CFU ml − 1 ) , harvested by centrifugation and washed three times with endotoxin-free PBS . 
Eight to 12 weeks old female C57B/6 mice were infected with 5000 to 10,000 CFU in 100 μl PBS by tailvein injection . 
Three days post infection , mice were sacrificed and spleen was prepared . 
2.2. Flow cytometry
To analyze the in vivo fluorescence of individual Salmo-nella , infected spleen was homogenized in 1 ml ice-cold PBS containing 0.17 % Triton X-100 to liberate intracellular Sal-monella . 
The suspension was filtered through 35 μm nylon nets , diluted tenfold in PBS , and fixed with 1 % ( final concentration ) formalin . 
GFP-expressing Salmonella were detected by flow cytometry ( Calibur , BD Biosciences ) using appropriate scatter gates and uncompensated detection of green and orange fluorescence after excitation at 488 nm as previously described ( Bumann , 2002 ) . 
In brief , particles with scatter properties typical for bacteria were identified as GFP-Salmonella based on the typical low orange/green emission ratio that was also detected in control samples containing pure GFP-Salmonella cultures . 
Interfering strongly autofluor-escent host cell fragments had about tenfold high orange / green emission ratios enabling successful ratiometric separation ( Figs. 1 , 2 ) . 
To analyze infected host cells , we homogenized infected spleen in the absence of detergent to avoid host cell lysis . 
Single-cell spleen suspensions were prepared by gentle mechanical homogenization with the piston of a 10 ml syringe in cold Hank 's balanced salt solution ( HBSS ) containing 10 % inactivated fetal calf serum . 
Alternative published protocols involving enzymatic tissue digestion with collagenase/DNase had lower yields of infected cells in our hands . 
We also did not lyse erythrocytes as various erythrocyte lysis protocols employing distilled water or buffered ammonium chloride solutions all decreased the yield of infected cells by 40 to 80 % . 
Spleen homogenates were fixed with 1 % formalin and analyzed by uncompensated two-color flow cytometry for separating green GFP fluorescence from autofluorescence as described above with adjusting the scatter gates to detect mammalian cells instead of free bacteria . 
Some samples were also sorted on a high-speed flow cytometric sorter ( MoFlow , Cytomation ) and recovered on microscope slides ( Superfrost Ultra Plus , Menzel ) for subsequent examination by confocal microscopy . 
To examine surface markers of infected cells , spleen homogenates were pre-incubated with a monoclonal antibody to CD16/CD32 ( Miltenyi ) to minimize unspecific antibody binding to Fc receptors on host cells . 
Cells were stained with anti-CD18-biotin ( BD Biosciences ) or anti-CD54-biotin ( BD Biosciences ) followed by streptavidin-APC ( BD Biosciences ) , anti-mouse scavenger receptor ( mAB 2F8 , RDI ) followed by anti-rat-Alexa 647 ( Molecular Probes ) , anti-B220-APC ( BD Biosciences ) , anti-F4 / 80-APC ( Serotec ) or Alexa 647-labeled anti-MHC II monocolonal antibody from hybridoma supernatants ( clone M5/114 .15.2 , ATCC ; Alexa 647 labeling kit from Molecular Probes ) . 
Samples were fixed with 1 % formalin and analyzed by flow cytometry as described above . 
Surface marker expression was determined based on dark-red emission after excitation at 633 nm . 
Fig. 3 . 
MHC II expression in differentially infected host cells . 
Host cells were identified as shown in Fig. 2A , and analyzed for GFP fluorescence and binding of a fluorescent monoclonal antibody to MHC II . 
Similar proportions of weakly and highly infected cells were highly positive for MHC II . 
2.3. Confocal microscopy
Slides with sorted cells were incubated over night in a humid chamber at 23 °C to promote attachment of sorted cells . 
Cells were embedded in Moviol and examined with a confocal microscope ( Leica TCS SP2 ) with excitation at 488 nm and emission range 496 to 540 nm . 
Stacks containing 30 optical sections at 0.5 μm intervals ( 15 μm total ) were recorded and converted to two-dimensional projections 
3.1. Selection of GFP-expressing Salmonella constructs
To investigate the functional relevance of infected host cell subpopulations that contain few or many Salmonella , a method for isolating such cells from infected mouse tissues would be required . 
One attractive strategy could use Salmonella expres-sing the green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) . 
The total green fluorescence of infected host cells would reflect the number of intracellular Salmonella as it has been shown for erythrocytes containing differential numbers of GFP-expressing Bartonella ( Schülein et al. , 2001 ) . 
However , this requires that individual Salmonella contain sufficient and homogenous GFP levels ( see below ) . 
We had previously isolated a large collection of Salmonella strains carrying different plasmid-encoded promoter -- gfp fusions ( Bumann , 2002 ; Rollenhagen et al. , 2004 ; Rollenhagen and Bumann , 2006 ) expressing moderate but sufficient in vivo amounts of GFP for fluorescence detection in infected mouse tissues ( Wendland and Bumann , 2002 ) . 
To determine their utility for the aims of this study , we re-examined their in vivo properties . 
All these Salmonella strains could be detected in spleen homogenates that were treated with the detergent Tx-100 that selectively lyses host cells to liberate intracellular Salmo-nella . 
Some host cell fragments exhibit interfering autofluorescence but this could be separated from GFP fluorescence using our two-color flow cytometric method ( Bumann , 2002 ) that is based on a ratiometric distinction between GFP-fluorescence ( high green/orange emission ratio ) and autofluorescence ( low green/orange emission ratio ) ( Fig. 1A ) . 
In this study we aimed at detecting intact infected host cells containing GFP-Salmonella . 
Indeed , we were able to detect particles with typical scatter properties of host cells exhibiting typical GFP-like fluorescence in infected spleen homogenates that had not been treated with detergent ( Fig. 1B ) . 
However , the autofluorescence of non-infected cells was much higher compared to detergent-treated host cell fragments ( detection threshold for GFP in infected cells about 35.000 copies per Salmonella vs. about 8.000 copies for Salmonella released from infected cells by selective detergent treatment ) . 
As a consequence , many Salmonella strains with weak in vivo GFP expression were unsuitable for detecting intact infected host cells . 
Sufficiently bright GFP-Salmonella enabled detection of infected cells ( Fig. 1B ) . 
The total GFP fluorescence of an infected host cells might reflect the actual number of Salmo-nella in this cell . 
However , this is only true if all Salmonella express similar amounts of GFP because it would otherwise be unclear if a particular host cell contained a single bright Sal-monella , or rather two or three dim Salmonella . 
Unfortunately , all our plasmid-based GFP-constructs had rather high variation in GFP content of individual Salmonella ( coefficients of variation higher than 5 ; Fig. 1A , C ) and were thus unsuitable . 
One potential source of variation in these constructs could be heterogeneous plasmid copy numbers in individual cells . 
Indeed , single-copy chromosomal promoter -- gfp fusions expressed rather homogenous in vivo GFP levels ( coefficients of variation 0.7 to 0.9 ; Fig. 2A , C ) . 
Low copy-number was commonly associated with insufficient GFP levels for detecting infected cells against the autofluorescence background , but one chromosomally-encoded construct was both sufficiently bright and homogenous ( Fig. 2 ) . 
In this strain , gfp was inserted immediately upstream of sifB which might affect sifB expression but this did not impair Salmonella virulence in agreement with our earlier observations ( Rollenhagen et al. , 2004 ) and the non-detectable virulence phenotype of SifB ( Ruiz-Albert et al. , 2002 ) . 
To test the utility of this construct to distinguish differentially infected host cells , we analyzed infected spleen homogenates that were not treated with Tx100 to preserve infected host cells . 
Among host cells with typical scatter properties and GFP-like fluorescence , a large range of fluorescence intensities was detected ( Fig. 2B , C ) . 
To determine if this differential fluorescence indeed reflected host cells containing various numbers of Salmonella , we sorted various subpopulations using sorting gates equivalent to fluorescence intensities of one , two , three to four , or more Salmonella ( Fig. 2C ) . 
The sorted cells were examined using confocal microscopy and associated GFP-Sal-monella were counted ( Fig. 2D , E ) . 
We found a close correlation between Salmonella numbers estimated based on the total green fluorescence and the actual number of intracellular Salmonella ( Fig. 2E ) . 
These data demonstrated that our technique successfully distinguished between differentially infected host cell subpopulations from mouse tissues . 
3.1.1 . 
Enumeration of differentially infected host cell subpopulations Since our technique reliably identified weakly and highly infected host cells , it might enable quantitative estimation of these subpopulations ( Fig. 2C ) . 
Based on GFP fluorescence intensity , 82 ± 5 % of the infected cells contained only one or two Salmonella ( mean ± SD from three experiments with a total number of six mice ) . 
These data were in excellent agreement with recent estimates for Salmonella-infected mouse liver ( about 85 % of the infected cells contain only one or two Sal-monella ) that were obtained with an independent method ( confocal microscopy of antibody-stained liver cryosections ) ( Sheppard et al. , 2003 ) . 
Both methods thus demonstrated a dominance of weakly infected host cells suggesting that these cells might be especially relevant for the progression of the infection ( Sheppard et al. , 2003 ) . 
Compared to the immunohistochemical method , flow cytometry is a rapid high-throughput method enabling rapid quantitative analysis of many samples . 
This could be especially useful for future comparisons of various Salmonella and mouse mutants to identify factors involved in the control of bacterial content in infected host cells . 
While the large majority of all infected host cells contained only few bacteria , some of the rare highly infected cells contained many Salmonella suggesting that these few highly infected host cells might have significantly contributed to the Salmonella load in infected tissues . 
Indeed , as much as 61 ± 9 % of the total GFP fluorescence ( as determined by multiplying the number of infected cells by their respective GF fluorescence ) was associated with infected cells containing more than two Salmonella . 
Re-calculation based on the immunohistochemical data ( Sheppard et al. , 2003 ) confirmed these results ( about 62 % of all Salmonella were associated with infected host cells containing two or more Salmonella ) . 
This suggested that in contrast to previous interpretations , highly infected host cells might be relevant for the disease process despite the fact that they constitute a minor subpopulation of all infected cells . 
3 . 
Results and discussion 
3.1.2 . 
Characterization of differentially infected host cells Highly infected host cells could belong to specific permissive cell types , or differ from weakly infected cells in their activation status . 
Such differences would be highly relevant for a better understanding of molecular and cellular mechanisms of infection control . 
Flow cytometry offers a convenient high-throughput method to determine expression of various cell type-or activation state-specific marker proteins by immunostaining with appropriate antibodies that are labeled with compatible fluorophores . 
Our two-color flow cytometric method utilizes green ( i.e. , FITC ) and orange ( i.e. , phycoerythrin ) emission channels for GFP detection . 
The third channel ( i.e. PerCP ) that collects red emission after blue excitation at 488 nm could be used for co-staining but might interfere with GFP detection depending on the spectral overlap and compensation accuracy . 
As a more convenient alternative for flow cytometers with multiple Lasers other excitation wavelength can also be used . 
In this study we measured cell type markers using 633 nm excitation and dark red emission filters ( channel four ; i.e. , APC , Alexa 647 ) . 
Staining with various surface markers revealed that most infected cells expressed CD18 but not B220 ( data not shown ) , and that large subpopulations were positive for the macrophage markers that typically recognize red pulp macrophages ( F4/80 ) or marginal zone macrophages ( scavenger receptor ) as observed previously ( Salcedo et al. , 2001 ) . 
We did not detect any significant difference between highly and weakly infected cells suggesting that similar cell types might contribute to both subpopulations . 
Further studies involving additional markers will be required to test this hypothesis . 
High Salmonella loads could result in strong activation of host cells . 
However , staining for macrophage activation markers MHC-II ( Fig. 3 ) and CD54 ( also called ICAM-1 , data not shown ) revealed similar expression levels in weakly and highly infected cells . 
These data suggested that highly infected cells were not further activated which might be related to Salmonella interference with host cell activation ( Kalupahana et al. , 2005 ) . 
In this study we have developed and validated a new rapid technique to detect , characterize and isolate subpopulations of differentially Salmonella-infected host cells from mouse tissue . 
Using this technique we showed that , surprisingly , the majority of Salmonella reside in a rare subpopulation of highly infected host cells . 
We expect that our technique might be useful to determine functional differences between host cell subpopulations and the identification of bacterial and host cell factors that control Salmonella load and proliferation in infected cells in vivo . 
Our approach might be also applicable to other intracellular pathogens that can be genetically manipulated . 
Acknowledgements
We thank Reinhold Förster and Thomas F. Meyer for generous support and Toni Aebischer for providing purified anti-MHC II antibody . 
This work was supported in part by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( Bu 971/5 -1 ; SFB621-A9 ) . 
References 
Becker , D. , Selbach , M. , Rollenhagen , C. , Ballmaier , M. , Meyer , T.F. , Mann , M. , Bumann , D. , 2006 . 
Robust Salmonella metabolism limits possibilities for new antimicrobials . 
Nature 440 , 303 -- 307 . 
Brown , S.P. , Cornell , S.J. , Sheppard , M. , Grant , A.J. , Maskell , D.J. , Grenfell , B.T. , Mastroeni , P. , 2006 . 
Intracellular demography and the dynamics of Salmonella enterica infections . 
PLoS Biol . 
4 , e349 . 
Bumann , D. , 2002 . 
Examination of Salmonella gene expression in an infected mammalian host using the green fluorescent protein and two-colour flow cytometry . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
43 , 1269 -- 1283 . 
Hoiseth , S.K. , Stocker , B.A. , 1981 . 
Aromatic-dependent Salmonella typhimur-ium are non-virulent and effective as live vaccines . 
Nature 291 , 238 -- 239 . 
Kalupahana , R.S. , Mastroeni , P. , Maskell , D. , Blacklaws , B.A. , 2005 . 
Activation of murine dendritic cells and macrophages induced by Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium . 
Immunology 115 , 462 -- 472 . 
Rollenhagen , C. , Bumann , D. , 2006 . 
Salmonella enterica highly expressed genes are disease specific . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
74 , 1649 -- 1660 . 
Rollenhagen , C. , Sorensen , M. , Rizos , K. , Hurvitz , R. , Bumann , D. , 2004 . 
Antigen selection based on expression levels during infection facilitates vaccine development for an intracellular pathogen . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci. , USA 101 , 8739 -- 8744 . 
Ruiz-Albert , J. , Yu , X.J. , Beuzon , C.R. , Blakey , A.N. , Galyov , E.E. , Holden , D.W. , 2002 . 
Complementary activities of SseJ and SifA regulate dynamics of the Salmonella typhimurium vacuolar membrane . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
44 , 645 -- 661 . 
Salcedo , S.P. , Noursadeghi , M. , Cohen , J. , Holden , D.W. , 2001 . 
Intracellular replication of Salmonella typhimurium strains in specific subsets of splenic macrophages in vivo . 
Cell . 
Microbiol . 
3 , 587 -- 597 . 
Santos , R.L. , Zhang , S. , Tsolis , R.M. , Kingsley , R.A. , Adams , L.G. , Baumler , A.J. , 2001 . 
Animal models of Salmonella infections : enteritis versus typhoid fever . 
Microbes Infect . 
3 , 1335 -- 1344 . 
Schülein , R. , Seubert , A. , Gille , C. , Lanz , C. , Hansmann , Y. , Piemont , Y. , Dehio , C. , 2001 . 
Invasion and persistent intracellular colonization of erythrocytes : a unique parasitic strategy of the emerging pathogen Bartonella . 
J. Exp . 
Med . 
193 , 1077 -- 1086 . 
Sheppard , M. , Webb , C. , Heath , F. , Mallows , V. , Emilianus , R. , Maskell , D. , Mastroeni , P. , 2003 . 
Dynamics of bacterial growth and distribution within the liver during Salmonella infection . 
Cell . 
Microbiol . 
5 , 593 -- 600 . 
Wendland , M. , Bumann , D. , 2002 . 
Optimization of GFP levels for analyzing Salmonella gene expression during an infection . 
FEBS Lett . 
521 , 105 -- 108 . 
Yrlid , U. , Wick , M.J. , 2002 . 
Antigen presentation capacity and cytokine production by murine splenic dendritic cell subsets upon Salmonella encounter . 
J. Immunol . 
169 , 108 -- 116