Oral administration of attenuated S. typhimurium
Nan Yang, Xiangying Zhu, Lishan Chen, Shenghua Li and Daming Ren*
Institute of Genetics; Fudan University; Shanghai, P.R. China
Abbreviations : RNAi , RNA interference ; shRNA , small hairpin RNA ; pSE , pSUP pSUPER_EGFP_scrambled RNA ; S. typhimurium , Salmomella typhimurium Key words : RNAi , Salmomella typhimurium , shRNA , tumor‑targeted , tumor therapy 
RNAi has been successfully applied in genomic research , and it also holds considerable promise as a therapeutic approach to suppress disease-causing gene expression . 
Here , we show that attenuated S. typhimurium were capable of delivering shRNAexpressing vectors to mammalian cells and inducing RNAi in vitro and in vivo . 
Upon oral administration , S. typhimurium carrying shRNA-expressing vectors targeting bcl2 induced significant gene silencing in murine melanoma cells that led to a remarkably delayed tumor growth and prolonged survival in the mouse model . 
These results suggest that bacteria mediated RNAi may be a new potent approach to the treatment of cancers . 
Introduction
RNA interference ( RNAi ) , conserved throughout many eukary otic organisms , is the sequence‑specific , post‑transcriptional gene silencing process initiated by double‑stranded RNAs ( dsRNAs ) which are homologous to the gene being suppressed . 
During RNAi , long dsRNA molecules are processed by Dicer , a cellular RNase III , into 19 to 23‑nt RNAs known as small interfering RNAs ( siRNAs ) that mediate the specific mRNA degradation .1,2 Ever since its discovery in nematode worms ,3 RNAi has become an extremely useful experimental tool in genomics . 
Moreover , RNAi has been supposed as a potential treatment for cancer ( For a review , see ref . 
4 ) . 
Despite its great potential , moving siRNA forward into the clinic is beset by problems with siRNA stability and delivery . 
Although , shRNA‑expressing vectors can mediate the long‑term knockdown of endogenous transcripts in cell culture and in vivo ,5,6 efficient delivery of the vectors still remains defective . 
Even with one of the most advanced approaches for RNAi delivery , further optimi zation is warranted to achieve a clinically acceptable dose of siRNAs administered .7 In cancer research , efforts have been made to seek a magic bullet that could selectively target and destroy malignant cells . 
The presence 
Results
It was previously shown that downregulation of bcl2 expression by RNAi can sensitize melanoma cell line B16F10 to apoptotic stimuli13 and it was also revealed that Salmonella can localize to transplantable murine tumors and partially inhibit tumor growth .20 In our study , we found a synergistic anti‑tumor effect exerted by orally administrated attenuated S. typhimurium carrying an anti‑bcl2 shRNA‑expressing vector . 
Treatment of SL3261/pbcl2 can remark ably inhibit tumor growth in mice bearing established melanoma and led to a prolongation of life span . 
Its anti‑tumor effect was more significant than that of SL3261 ( or SL3261/pSEscr ) , which suggests that combination therapeutics of S. typhimurium and RNAi may offer a more potent treatment in cancer therapy than anti‑tumor bacteria alone . 
However , despite the significant improvement of survival , complete tumor regression was not observed in the treated mouse . 
After a certain period although there were still living S. typhimurium in tumor tissues , the tumor growth resuscitated and all the mice died of progressively growing tumor . 
This reflects the limitation of signal‑target‑attacking strategy in cancer therapy due to the multifarious causes of tumorigenesis . 
Simultaneous silencing of other critical genes in tumor development is expected to achieve a more remarkable anti‑tumor effect . 
The finding of genes of putative prokaryotic origins in the human genome strengthened the hypothesis that a genomic information transfer has taken place during evolution , which cast possibilities of employing bacteria as gene delivery vectors . 
However , although the potent use of attenuated S. typhimurium as a tumor‑specific gene delivering tool has been investigated over many years , little is known at the cellular level of the precise events involved in the gene transfer between bacteria and tumor cells . 
Based on previous studies on the trans‑kingdom gene transfer process ( reviewed by Christoph Schoen21 and John Pawelek22 ) , through oral administration to tumor‑bearing mice , S. typhimurium preferentially accumulated in tumors probably due to the tumor environment that met nutri tional requirements of bacteria amplification as well as provided an immune shelter that inhibits the clearance of Salmonella . 
Previous studies showing that several tumors express transforming growth factor b ( TGF‑b ) and TGFb can inhibit fasligand induced neutrophil activation and infiltration , supported the contention that bacterial clearance mechanisms may be inhibited within tumors .23 Once S. typhimurium containing shRNA‑expressing vectors entered mamma lian cells the bacterial carriers were lysed within the phagolysosomes , resulting in intraphagosomal release with subsequent transfer of plasmid DNA into the cytosol . 
The delivered DNA subsequently enter the nucleus ,24 where the eukaryotic H1‑RNA promoter in the vector can drive the expression of shRNA and ultimately provoke specific gene silencing in tumor cells . 
100 units/ml of penicillin and 100 mg/ml of streptomycin until harvested . 
Quantitative Real-Time PCR ( qRT-PCR ) Analysis for bcl2 gene expression . 
Total RNA was prepared using the TRIzol reagent ( Invitrogen ) and cDNA was synthesized using oligo ( dT ) with AccessQuick ™ RT‑PCR System ( Promega ) . 
qRT‑PCR was performed on the iQ5 Real‑Time PCR Detection System ( Bio‑rad ) using SYBR ® RT‑PCR Kit ( Takara ) . 
Relative gene expression was quantified using the comparative threshold cycle method15 and b‑actin as an internal standard . 
Primer sequences of selected genes and details in conditions for PCR reactions were reported previously in ref . 
16 . 
Western blot . 
Western blot was performed ( as previously described in ref . 
17 ) . 
In brief , cells were scraped off , washed and lysed ( Biodev Tech ) . 
We applied 20 mg of the total protein to 12 % SDS‑PAGE and transferred to PVDF membrane . 
Antibodies ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) against Bcl2 and GAPDH were used . 
Protein bands were detected using ECL ( Amersham ) . 
Assessment of apoptosis . 
Apoptotic cells were identified by their subdiploid DNA content using flow cytometric analysis ( as previously described Ref . 
18 ) . 
In brief , fixed cells were treated with 50 mg/ml PI and 10 mg/ml RnaseA before analyzed on a FACScalibur flow cytometer with an argon laser tuned at 488 nm and use of CellQuest software ( Becton Dickinson , Rutherford , NJ ) . 
Hypochromatic cells resulting from chromatin condensation with subdiploid DNA profiles were identified as the apoptotic fraction of cells . 
Cell debris was excluded from analysis by appropriate light scattergating . 
Animal tumor model and bacteria infection . 
C57BL/6 mice , 4 -- 6 week old , female , were used for tumor growth models and infection studies . 
5 x 105 of B16‑F10 cells were implanted subcu taneously before bacteria infections . 
Treatments initiated when the tumors reached an average volume of 50 -- 60 mm3 . 
Each group of mice received 1 x 109 c.f.u. of corresponding Salmonella ( SL3261 , SL3261/pSEscr or SL3261/pSbcl2 ) orally and control mice received saline . 
Tumor diameters were measured at regular intervals with cali pers , and the tumor volume in mm3 was calculated by the formula : 
To investigate bacteria distribution at various time points after bacteria administration , groups of 3 -- 5 mice were killed and their tumors , livers and spleens were collected , weighted and homog enized in 2 ml ice‑cold sterile PBS . 
Bacterial counts were performed after plating these homogenates onto L broth ( Sigma ) agar plate containing kanamycin ( 75 mg/ml ) . 
For qRT‑PCR and western blot analysis of melanoma raised in C57BL/6 mice , the frozen samples were homogenized in liquid nitrogen and processed as described above for cultured cells . 
Analysis of expression plasmids transference to host cells in vivo . 
Total RNA was isolated from tumor tissues with the TRIzol reagent ( Invitrogen ) . 
Synthesis of cDNA was performed as mentioned above for cultured cells . 
cDNA was used to perform PCR for detection of EGFPexpression.Primers : forward ,5 ' GAGCGCACCATCTTCTTC 3 ' ; reverse , 5 ' CGTCTAGATTACTTGTACAGCTCGTC‑3 ' . 
Statistics . 
Data statistical analysis was performed using the SPSS statistic software package ( SPSS , Chicago , IL ) . 
All results were expressed as means ± SE , and p < 0.05 was used for significance . 
Acknowledgements