RESEARCH NOTE
Assessment by electron-microscopy of recombinant Vibrio cholerae and Salmonella vaccine strains expressing enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli-speciﬁc surface antigens V. Ziethlow1 , D. Favre2 , J.-F . 
Viret2 , J. Frey3 and M. H. Stoffel1 
A B S T R A C T
Diarrhoea caused by enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli ( ETEC ) requires adhesion of microorganisms to enterocytes . 
Hence , a promising approach to immunoprophylaxis is to elicit antibodies against colonisation factor antigens ( CFAs ) . 
Genes encoding the most prevalent ETEC-speciﬁc surface antigens were cloned into Vibrio cholerae and Salmonella vaccine strains . 
Expression of surface antigens was assessed by electron-microscopy . 
Whereas negative staining was effective in revealing CFA ⁄ I and CS3 , but not CS6 , immunolabelling allowed identiﬁcation of all surface antigens examined . 
The V. cholerae vaccine strain CVD103 did not express ETEC-speciﬁc colonisation factors , whereas CVD103-HgR expressed CS3 only . 
However , expression of both CFA ⁄ I and CS3 was demonstrated in Salmonella Ty21a . 
Keywords Colonising factor antigens, enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC), im labelling, surface antigens, vaccine
Original Submission : 7 May 2007 ; Revised Submission : 31 August 2007 ; Accepted : 8 October 2007 
Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli ( ETEC ) is a major cause of diarrhoea worldwide [ 1 ] . 
Despite extensive research , no licensed vaccine for humans is available to date . 
The pathogenesis of ETEC diarrhoea involves two crucial steps that concurrently provide two possible targets for vaccine development : the attachment of the bacteria to the mucosa of the small intestine via speciﬁc colonisation factors , and the subsequent secretion of at least one of two enterotoxins [ 2 ] . 
Attachment of microorganisms to enterocytes is mediated by adhesins termed colonisation factor antigens ( CFAs ) or pili [ 3 ] , and 22 different ETEC surface antigens have been reported [ 4 ] ; however , 70 % of isolates associated with diarrhoea in humans express either CFA ⁄ I , CFA ⁄ II or CFA ⁄ IV [ 5 ] or a combination of these [ 2 ] . 
Epidemiological studies have shown that the expression of these CFAs varies according to geographical location and time . 
Hence , surface antigens occurring with the highest frequency in the target population should be included in a future vaccine against ETEC diarrhoea [ 6 ] . 
A possible approach to a vaccine might aim at generating a live recombinant polyvalent vaccine strain that simultaneously expresses the most relevant ETEC pili . 
As a ﬁrst step towards the creation of such a polyvalent vaccine strain , the present study describes the expression and morphology of ETEC-speciﬁc CFA ⁄ I , CS3 and CS6 in recombinant monovalent Vibrio cholerae CVD103 , CVD103-HgR and Salmonella Ty21a vaccine strains . 
The following strains were used : E. coli strains DH10B ( K12 laboratory strain ) , H10407 , DS198-1 , B7A and E34420A ( wild-type strains ) ; V. cholerae CVD103 and CVD103-HgR ; and Salmonella Typhi Ty21a . 
The construction of V. cholerae recombinant strains has been reported previously [ 7 ] . 
Salmonella Typhi Ty21a recombinant strains were obtained by electroporation of plasmids pSSVI215-cfaI ⁄ S , pSSVI215-CS3 , and pSSVI215-CS6 . 
The stability of plasmids was analysed by growing the cultures in exponential phase for ten generations in the absence of antibiotics . 
The persistence of plasmids was then conﬁrmed in single colonies by growth on solid medium containing the corresponding antibiotics and by plasmid puriﬁcation . 
Bacterial strains were cultured and processed as described previously [ 8 ] . 
ETEC wild-type strains expressing corresponding surface antigens were used as positive controls . 
Control reactions for immunogold label-ling included omission of primary antibodies and use of inappropriate antibodies as substitutes for pertinent primary antibodies . 
Expression of CFA ⁄ I , CS3 and CS6 pili in recombinant monovalent vaccine strains was matched with the expression of corresponding surface antigens in ETEC wild-type strains . 
Binding patterns of monoclonal antibodies in western blots are shown in Fig. 1 . 
The polyclonal antibodies used displayed extensive non-speciﬁc binding patterns in ETEC wild-type H10407 and E. coli K12 strains ( results not shown ) . 
The results of analysis by electron-microscopy using negative staining and immunogold labelling are shown in Fig. 2 . 
The present study was undertaken to validate the expression of ETEC-speciﬁc surface antigens by three carrier strains with respect to their potential use as vaccines . 
In view of the current epidemiology of ETEC , a vaccine comprising CFA ⁄ I , CS3 and CS6 ﬁmbriae would provide protection against 50 -- 70 % of all ETEC infections , depending on variations in the regional prevalence of these adhesion factors . 
Inclusion of further , non-ﬁmbrial , antigens might increase coverage even further . 
The use of live carrier bacteria is widely recognised as a valid vaccine strategy against intestinal pathogens . 
One of the main drawbacks relates to vaccine safety . 
However , the use of marketed live vaccines as carriers of foreign antigens has provided evidence of clear medical and regulatory advantages . 
In such a vaccine , stabilisation of antigens , either by integrating the corresponding genes into the carrier 's chromosome or by using a so-called lethal balanced system , is compulsory . 
In the present proof-of-concept study , molecular methods were used to ensure that plasmids carrying the genes for the relevant antigens were stable and that the genes were expressed . 
Beyond this , proper synthesis and location of the expected proteins must be established in potential vaccine strains . 
The present study used transmission electron-microscopy , in combination with negative staining and immunogold labelling , to assess the expression of cloned genes and the physical presence of the corresponding antigens in recombinant host strains in comparison with wild-type strains . 
Substantial cross-reactivity was observed in western blot analysis with all polyclonal antibodies employed , but these antibodies were valuable in monitoring the expression of pilin in recombinant vaccine strains , as the prominent cross-reactivity seen in E. coli was virtually absent in most host strains . 
Negative staining was a useful tool for visualising CFA ⁄ I and CS3 pili . 
However , the morphology varied , and the ﬁmbriae expressed in recombinant strains seemed to be more frail and were lost more easily during sample handling . 
As the morphology of pili is dependent on strain properties as well as handling procedures , negative staining is insufﬁcient to characterise these surface structures . 
In contrast , immunogold labelling with speciﬁc anti-CFA ⁄ I antibodies provided unequivocal evidence of CFA ⁄ I and CS3 expression . 
CS3 pili were demonstrated by negative staining , but their morphology varied and depended on the host in which they were expressed . 
Immunogold labelling conﬁrmed the presence of a continuous ﬁmbrial layer in ETEC wild-type strains . 
In recombinant V. cholerae CVD103-HgR-CS3 and Salmonella-CS3 , CS3 pili appeared as cluster-like structures . 
These observations are consistent with previous ﬁndings of focal CS3 pili expression in recombinant CVD103-HgR strains [ 9 ] . 
To date , it has not been possible to demonstrate CS6 pili morphologically , even in ETEC wild-type strains [ 7,9 -- 11 ] . 
Interestingly , the only labelling observed with monoclonal anti-CS6 antibodies was limited to the immediate vicinity of damaged bacterial wall areas in wild-type ETEC CS6 . 
Considering the preferential labelling of CS6 pilin seen in immunoblots , monoclonal anti-CS6 antibodies are likely to identify intracellular antigen becoming accessible following cell leakage in electron-microscopy . 
CS6 surface antigens are known to be synthesised via the chaperone-usher pathway [ 12 ] , with the single CS6 pilins being assembled in the periplasmic space . 
Proper formation depends on the presence of appropriate machinery . 
The seemingly contradictory ﬁnding that CS6 can be demonstrated on recombinant V. cholerae strains by western blots , but fails to appear at the cell surface in immunogold label-ling , may reﬂect the accumulation of pilin subunits in the periplasmic space because of the absence of required chaperones and ushers . 
In contrast , the presence of CS6 pilin was revealed by western blot analysis because of fractionation of bacteria , while immunogold labelling failed to reveal the antigen because of its seclusion in the periplasmic space . 
In summary , plasmid-encoded expression of genes encoding surface antigens resulted in adequate surface expression of CFA ⁄ I pili in recombinant Salmonella-CFA ⁄ I strains , and CS3 pili were formed in V. cholerae CVD103-HgR-CS3 and Salmonella-CS3 strains . 
Of the three vaccine strains examined , Salmonella Ty21a was the most promising candidate carrier for expressing ETEC-speciﬁc surface antigens . 
The use of Salmonella Typhi strains as vectors would have the added advantage of including another important enteric pathogen in a highly speciﬁc polyvalent live attenuated vaccine . 
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
The technical support of Y. Schlatter and S. König is gratefully acknowledged . 
We thank N. Kapp and J. W. Maierl for helpful discussions . 
This study was supported by grant no . 
KTI-7304 .1 LSPP-LS of the Swiss Federal Ofﬁce for Industrial Education and Technology . 
J.-F . 
Viret is an employee of Berna Biotech Ltd. . 
The authors have provided no other information concerning the presence or absence of conﬂicting or dual interests . 
1 . 
Girard MP , Steele D , Chaignat CL , Kieny MP . 
A review of vaccine research and development : human enteric infections . 
Vaccine 2006 ; 24 : 2732 -- 2750 . 
2 . 
McKenzie R , Bourgeois AL , Engstrom F et al. . 
Comparative safety and immunogenicity of two attenuated enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli vaccine strains in healthy adults . 
Infect Immun 2006 ; 74 : 994 -- 1000 . 
3 . 
Wenneras C , Qadri F , Bardhan PK , Sack RB , Svennerholm AM . 
Intestinal immune responses in patients infected with enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli and in vaccinees . 
Infect Immun 1999 ; 67 : 6234 -- 6241 . 
4 . 
Boedeker EC . 
Vaccines for enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli : current status . 
Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2005 ; 21 : 15 -- 19 . 
5 . 
Turner AK , Beavis JC , Stephens JC et al. . 
Construction and phase I clinical evaluation of the safety and immunoge-nicity of a candidate enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli vac - ⁄ cine strain expressing colonization factor antigen CFA I. Infect Immun 2006 ; 74 : 1062 -- 1071 . 
6 . 
Gaastra W , Svennerholm AM . 
Colonization factors of human enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli ( ETEC ) . 
Trends Microbiol 1996 ; 4 : 444 -- 452 . 
7 . 
Favre D , Lüdi S , Stoffel M et al. . 
Expression of enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli colonization factors in Vibrio cholerae . 
Vaccine 2006 ; 24 : 4354 -- 4368 . 
8 . 
Lüdi S , Frey J , Favre D , Stoffel MH . 
Assessing the expression of enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli-speciﬁc surface antigens in recombinant strains by transmission electron microscopy and immunolabeling . 
J Histochem Cytochem 2006 ; 54 : 473 -- 477 . 
9 . 
Lüdi S , Frey J , Favre D et al. . 
Morphological and immu-nocytochemical analysis of Escherichia coli-speciﬁc surface antigens in wildtype strains and in recombinant Vibrio cholerae . 
Ant v Leeuw 2007 ; in press . 
10 . 
de Lorimier AJ , Byrd W , Hall ER et al. . 
Murine antibody response to intranasally administered enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli colonization factor CS6 . 
Vaccine 2003 ; 21 : 2548 -- 2555 . 
11 . 
Nishikawa Y , Helander A , Ogasawara J et al. . 
Epidemiology and properties of heat-stable enterotoxin-producing Escherichia coli serotype O169 : H41 . 
Epidemiol Infect 1998 ; 121 : 31 -- 42 . 
12 . 
Soto GE , Hultgren SJ . 
Bacterial adhesins : common themes and variations in architecture and assembly . 
J Bacteriol 1999 ; 181 : 1059 -- 1071 . 
Identiﬁcation of immunodominant VP1 linear epitope of enterovirus 71 ( EV71 ) using synthetic peptides for detecting human anti-EV71 IgG antibodies in western blots D. G. W. Foo1 , R. X. Ang1 , S. Alonso1 , V. T. K. Chow1 , S. H. Quak2 and C. L. Poh1 ,3 
A major IgG-speciﬁc immunodominant VP1 linear epitope of enterovirus 71 ( EV71 ) strain 41 ( 5865 ⁄ SIN ⁄ 00009 ) , deﬁned by the core sequence LEGTTNPNG , was identiﬁed by Pepscan analysis . 
Oligonucleotides corresponding to the amino-acid sequence of synthetic peptide SP32 were cloned and over-expressed in Escherichia coli as a recombinant glutathione-S-transferase ( GST ) -- SP32 fusion protein . 
In ELISAs , this protein did not react with human anti-EV71 IgG antibodies , but there was signiﬁcant immunoreactivity according to western blot analysis . 
The amino-acid sequence of SP32 was highly speciﬁc for detecting EV71 strains in western blot analysis , and showed no immunoreactivity with monoclo-nal antibodies raised against other enteroviruses , e.g. , CA9 and Echo 6 . 
Keywords Detection , enterovirus 71 , immunodominant linear epitope , pepscan analysis , recombinant GST -- SP32 fusion protein , synthetic peptide 
Original Submission : 11 May 2007 ; Revised Submission : 23 July 2007 ; Accepted : 28 September 2007 
Corresponding author and reprint requests : C. L. Poh , Faculty of Life and Social Sciences , Swinburne University of Technology , John Street , Hawthorn , Victoria 3122 , Australia E-mail : cpoh@groupwise.swin.edu.au