Cell Host & Microbe Ar ticle 
Delivery of a Salmonella Typhi Exotoxin 
from a Host Intracellular Compartment
Stefania Spanò ,1,2 Juan E. Ugalde ,1,2 and Jorge E. Galán1 , * 
1Section of Microbial Pathogenesis , Boyer Center for Molecular Medicine , Yale University School of M 2These authors contributed equally to this work . 
* Correspondence : jorge.galan@yale.edu DOI 10.1016 / j.chom .2007.11.001 
edicine , New Haven , CT 06536 , USA 
SUMMARY 
Salmonella Typhi , an exclusive human pathogen and the cause of typhoid fever , expresses a functional cytolethal distending toxin for which only the active subunit , CdtB , has been identiﬁed . 
Here , we show that PltA and PltB , which are encoded in the same pathogenicity islet as cdtB , associate with CdtB to form a multipartite toxin . 
PltA and PltB are homologs of components of the pertussis toxin , including its ADP-ribosyl transferase subunit . 
We also show that PltA and PltB are required for the delivery of CdtB from an intracellular compartment to target cells via autocrine and paracrine pathways . 
We hypothesize that this toxin , which we have named `` typhoid toxin , '' and its delivery mechanism may contribute to S. Typhi 's unique virulence properties . 
INTRODUCTION
Typhoid fever caused by Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi ( S. Typhi ) results in 200,000 annual deaths world-wide , mostly in developing countries where infections are endemic ( Ivanoff et al. , 1994 ) . 
Unlike other Salmonella enterica serovars , S. Typhi can only infect humans , causing life-threatening systemic infections as well as persistent , often life-time colonization by establishing residence most commonly within the gall bladder ( House et al. , 2001 ; Parry et al. , 2002 ) . 
Despite its public health importance , relatively little is known about the virulence factors that confer on this bacterium its unique pathogenicity . 
Comparison of the nucleotide sequence of the genome of S. Typhi with those of other S. enterica serovars has shown the presence of an unusually large number of pseudogenes in this human adapted serovar ( Deng et al. , 2003 ; Edwards et al. , 2002 ; Parkhill et al. , 2001 ) . 
This observation has led to the proposal that the reduction of its functional genome may be at least in part responsible for S. Typhi 's narrow host range . 
Genome comparison has also revealed the presence of a small number of putative virulence genes that are unique to this serovar or that have very limited distribution among other S. enterica serovars and , therefore , may contribute to its distinctive virulence properties . 
One of these genes encodes CdtB , a homolog of the active or `` A '' subunit of the cytolethal distending toxin ( CDT ) ( Haghjoo and Galán , 2004 ) . 
This toxin , which is present in several bacterial pathogens , 
DNA damage on the intoxicated cells ( Lara-Tejero and Galán , 2000 , 2002 ) . 
Unlike other bacteria that encode CDT , S. Typhi does not encode homologs of the `` B '' subunits of CDT ( i.e. , CdtA and CdtC ) , which mediate toxin delivery into target cells . 
However , S. typhi CdtB can induce DNA damage when it is transiently expressed or microinjected into the cytosol of mammalian cells ( Haghjoo and Galán , 2004 ) . 
More importantly , S. Typhi possesses cytolethal distending toxicity , and CdtB is delivered by an unknown pathway that is strictly dependent on bacterial internalization into host cells ( Haghjoo and Galán , 2004 ) . 
In fact , cdtB is unusual in that it is only expressed by intracellularly localized S. Typhi . 
Here , we report that two proteins , PltA and PltB , which are encoded within the same pathogenicity islet that carries cdtB , exhibit amino acid sequence similarity to the pertussis toxin `` A '' subunit and one of the components of its heteropentameric `` B '' subunit , respectively . 
Like cdtB , expression of pltA and pltB is induced intracellularly . 
Remarkably , we found that PltA and 
PltB form a complex with CdtB and are required for cytolethal distending toxicity by aiding the delivery of CdtB through auto-crine and paracrine pathways . 
RESULTS
S. Typhi Encodes Homologs of the Pertussis Toxin that Are Expressed by Intracellular Bacteria cdtB is encoded within a pathogenicity islet that is unique to 
S. Typhi . 
Closer inspection of this islet revealed the presence of two open reading frames capable of encoding polypeptides with signiﬁcant amino acid sequence similarity to the pertussis toxin ADP-ribosylating `` A '' subunit and just one of the 5 components of its heteropentameric `` B '' subunit ( Kaslow and Burns , 1992 ) ( we named these genes pltA and pltB for pertussis-like toxin A and B , respectively ) ( Figure 1A and Figure S1 available with this article online ) . 
Puriﬁed PltA was able to ADP-ribosylate a protein in host cell lysates , although PltA , a derivative E133A carrying a mutation in a residue predicted to be important for ca-talysis , did not ( Figure S2 ) . 
These results suggest that PltA is an active toxin . 
The absence of homologs of critical components of the pertussis toxin B subunit was reminiscent of S. Typhi CDT , which , as discussed above , also lacks the components of its B subunit . 
Since cdtB is expressed only after bacterial internalization into host cells ( Haghjoo and Galán , 2004 ) , we tested whether pltA and pltB expression was also induced once S. Typhi reached an intracellular compartment . 
We found low expression bacterial culture medium ( Figure 1B ) . 
However , like cdtB , transcription of pltBA was induced after infection of cultured intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 1B ) . 
Consistent with this observation , epitope-tagged PltB was not detected after up to 3 hr of infection of cultured intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 1C ) . 
However , PltB was readily detected on the surface of intracellular bacteria 
causes cell-cycle arrest and cellular distension because it inﬂicts of the pltBA operon when S. Typhi was grown in standar 
5 hr after infection of cultured intestinal cells ( Figure 1C ) . 
Eight hours after infection , staining in the form of puncta radiating from the S. Typhi containing vacuole was also noticeable . 
By 24 hr of infection , the PltB-stained puncta , which we hypothesize represent toxin that has left the bacteria-containing vacuole , were readily seen throughout the cell ( Figure 1C ) . 
Taken together , these results showed that , like cdtB , the expression of pltA and pltB is induced within host cells and suggest that the toxin can exit the bacteria-containing vacuole to localize in puncta-like structures . 
tionship between the CdtB and PltA/PltB toxins , although such relationship does not involve the enzymatic activity of PltA . 
Consequently , these results suggest that CdtB may require PltA/PltB for its secretion and/or delivery into target cells , perhaps because these proteins are recognized as a complex by the machineries involved in either of these processes . 
PltA and PltB Are Required for CdtB
Delivery from an Intracellular Compartment We tested the hypothesis that PltA and PltB are required for CdtB secretion from the bacterial cell . 
Indeed , other multisubunit toxins , such as pertussis toxin , are known to require speciﬁc secretion systems to export the folded and assembled toxin from the bacterial periplasm to the extracellular space ( Burns , 2003 ; Farizo et al. , 2000 ) . 
However , this does not seem to be the case since equivalent levels of CdtB were found in detergent-soluble lysates ( which represent the secreted fraction of the toxin ) of cells infected with either wild-type or the DpltA or DpltB mutants , although CdtB , a mutant lacking the predicted sec D1-22 secretion signal , was not found in the lysates ( Figure 3A ) . 
We 
Figure 1 . 
Expression and Delivery of the PltA/PltB Toxin by Intracellular S. Typhi 
( A ) Diagram of the S. Typhi pathogenicity islet that encodes CdtB , PltA , and PltB . 
The positions of the insertion sequences ( IS ) that delineate the boundaries of this islet are indicated . 
( B ) Expression of pltA : : luciferase reporter by S. Typhi at different times during growth in LB broth or after infection of cul ¬ 
tured Henle-407 intestinal epithelial cells . 
Numbers represent arbitrary units standardized by the number of bacteria and considering the value obtained 6 hr after infection of cultured cells to be 100 . 
Values represent the mean ± standard deviation of three independent determinations . 
The differences be ¬ 
tween the measurements in vitro at the time of infection and 6 hr after infection were statistically signiﬁcant ( p < 0.001 ) . 
( C ) Immunoﬂuorescence staining of cells infected with a strain of S. Typhi that encodes a 33-FLAG epitope-tagged PltB . 
Cells were infected and stained at different times postinfection 
( as indicated ) with a mouse monoclonal antibody speciﬁc for the FLAG epitope ( green ) and a rabbit antibody speciﬁc for S. Typhi ( red ) and DAPI ( blue ) . 
Scale bar , 5 mm . 
PltA and PltB Are Required for CdtB Toxicity 
To investigate the potential role of PltA/PltB in S. Typhi host-cell interactions , we infected cultured intestinal epithelial cells with a DpltA or a DpltB S. Typhi mutant strain . 
Surprisingly , cells infected with either of these mutants did not show the typical 
signs of cytolethal distending intoxication associated with CdtB , such as cytoplasmic distension and cell-cycle arrest ( Figure 2 ) . 
The toxicity of the DpltA or the DpltB strains was recovered when the mutants were complemented with plasmids encoding wild-type alleles of these genes . 
Impor ¬ 
tantly , a plasmid encoding the catalytic mutant PltA was also able to complement the pheno-E133A type of the DpltA mutant strain , indicating that the catalytic activity of PltA is not required for its contribution to the CdtB-dependent toxicity . 
Taken together , these results demonstrate a functional rela ¬ 
Effect of DpltA and DpltB on cytolethal distending toxicity . 
Henle-407 cells were infected with different S. Typhi strains as indicated , and 72 hr after infection , the cells were examined by phase contrast microscopy ( insets ) or processed to measure DNA content by ﬂow cytometry as described in the Experimental Procedures . 
The peaks corresponding to cells in G0-G1 , S , or G2 are indicated . 
Equivalent results were obtained in several repetitions of the same experiment . 
Scale bars , 50 mm . 
then compared the localization of epitope-tagged CdtB in wildtype and the DpltA or DpltB mutant strains . 
Cells infected with wild-type bacteria showed a CdtB-staining pattern indistinguishable from that observed with PltB : no staining at early ( up to 3 hr ) times of infection , prominent bacterially-associated staining at 5 hr after infection , and staining in the form of puncta radiating from the bacteria-containing vacuole at 5 hr and 8 hr of infection and throughout the cell after 24 hr of infection ( Figure 3B ) . 
Differential staining , confocal microscopy , and protease susceptibility experiments indicated that the CdtB puncta were located mostly within the cell ( Figure 3C and Figure S3 and S4 ) . 
CdtB that was not associated with bacteria ( and therefore representing the fraction already secreted from the bacteria ) could be detected in a compartment with a buoyant density of z1 .15 g cm 3 ( equivalent to 35 % sucrose ) and was resistant to protease ( unless in the presence of Triton X-100 ) ( Figure S5 ) . 
These results suggest that a signiﬁcant proportion of this fraction of CdtB was contained within a membrane-bound compartment . 
In contrast , cells infected with the DpltA or DpltB mutant strains showed CdtB staining in association with the bacterial surface but never associated with puncta , even after 24 hr of infection ( Figure 3D ) . 
The distribution of CdtB in puncta throughout the cell was restored upon introduction of a plasmid encoding pltBA ( Figure 3D ) . 
These results indicate that the lack of cytolethal distending toxicity in the DpltA or DpltB mutants is not due to a defect in CdtB secretion from the bacteria but presumably from its failure to exit the Salmonella-containing vacuole and reach its place of action . 
CdtB, PltA, and PltB Form a Complex In Vitro and Colocalize within Host Cells
The functional relationship between PltA , PltB , and CdtB suggested the possibility that these proteins form a complex that may be required for the delivery of CdtB to its place of action . 
We , therefore , tested whether PltA , PltB , and CdtB could form a complex in vitro . 
Polyhistidine-tagged versions of these proteins were expressed in E. coli , puriﬁed from inclusion bodies , refolded in vitro , and tested for their ability to form a complex by gel ﬁltration or ion exchange chromatography . 
When refolded together and applied to a gel ﬁltration column , PltA and PltB eluted with a proﬁle that indicated the formation of a complex ( Figure 4A ) . 
The ability of CdtB to interact with the PltA/PltB complex was tested by ion exchange chromatography . 
When applied by itself to a MonoQ ion exchange column , CdtB was not retained and was recovered in the ﬂow-through fraction ( Figure 4B ) . 
Under the same running conditions , the PltA/PltB complex was retained in the MonoQ column ( data not shown ) . 
Addition of CdtB to the PltA/PltB complex resulted in the retention of CdtB in the column , indicating that the three proteins form a complex ( Figure 4B ) . 
We then tested whether CdtB colocalizes with PltA/PltB during bacterial infection . 
Henle-407 cells were infected with a S. Typhi strain encoding 33-FLAG epitope-tagged 
Figure 2 . 
PltA and PltB Are Required for CdtB Toxicity 
PltB and a 33-Myc epitope-tagged CdtB , and the localization of these proteins was investigated by ﬂuorescence microscopy . 
As shown in Figure 4C , CdtB and PltB colocalized both on the bacterial surface and in puncta throughout the cell . 
Taken together , these results indicate that , consistent with their functional relationship , CdtB forms a complex with PltA and PltB and trafﬁcs through the cell presumably in association with these proteins . 
CdtB Is Exported to the Extracellular Medium in a PltA/PltB-Dependent Fashion
We found that infection of cultured epithelial cells with S. Typhi resulted in cytolethal distending intoxication of virtually all cells despite the fact that only a fraction of the cells were actually infected . 
This observation suggested the possibility that CdtB is transported to the culture medium , intoxicating cells in a para-crine fashion . 
We , therefore , examined whether CdtB toxic activity could be detected in the culture medium of infected cells . 
Cells were infected with wild-type S. Typhi , and 24 hr after infection , the presence of cytolethal distending activity in the bacte-ria-free culture medium was examined by applying cell culture supernatant ﬁltrates to uninfected cells . 
Cells that were treated with a culture ﬁltrate of cells that had been infected with wildtype S. Typhi showed clear signs of intoxication such as cellular distension and cell-cycle arrest ( Figure 5 ) . 
In contrast , cells treated with a culture ﬁltrate obtained from cells infected with the S. Typhi DpltA , DpltB , or DcdtB mutant strains showed no signs of toxicity ( Figure 5 ) . 
Consistent with the presence of toxi activity in the infection medium , both CdtB and PltB were detected by western blot analysis of ﬁltrates obtained from infected cells ( Figure S6 ) . 
The presence of the toxin in the cultured supernatant was not likely due to lysis of the infected cells since the total number of cells and , more speciﬁcally , the number of infected cells did not change over the course of the experiment fection medium ( Figure S8 ) and , as shown above , CdtB did not appear in puncta in cells infected with the DpltA or DpltB mutant strains ( see Figure 3D ) . 
Taken together , these results indicate that CdtB is transported from its site of production within the host cell to the extracellular medium and that PltA and PltB are essential for this transport . 
CdtB Intoxicates Cells via Autocrine and Paracrine Delivery Pathways
The presence of CdtB-dependent cytolethal distending toxicity in the culture medium suggested the presence of a potential paracrine mechanism by which the exported toxin may intoxicate uninfected neighboring cells or may even reach systemic sites to intoxicate cells from other tissues . 
To investigate this possibility , we infected cells with wild-type S. Typhi at a multiplicity of infections such that only 60 % of the cells were infected . 
Subsequent to infection , we added a toxin-neutralizing antibody , and at 48 hr postinfection , we examined cells for signs of cytole-thal distending intoxication . 
Addition of the neutralizing antibody completely blocked the distension and cell-cycle arrest of uninfected cells . 
Surprisingly , however , addition of the neutralizing antibody also blocked the distension and cell-cycle arrest of infected cells ( Figure 6A ) as well as the ability of CdtB to induce DNA damage ( as measured by the detection of phosphorylated histone H2AX in the nucleus of infected cells ; Lowndes and Toh , 2005 ) ( Figure 6B ) . 
However , the presence of the CdtB-associ-ated puncta in infected cells was not affected by the addition of the neutralizing antibody ( Figure 6C ) , indicating that addition 
Figure 3 . 
PltA and PltB Are Required for CdtB Delivery from an Intracellular Com ¬ 
partment ( A ) Production and secretion of CdtB is not affected in the pltA or pltB mutant strains . 
Henle ¬ 
407 cells were infected with wild-type S. Typhi or its isogenic DpltA or DpltB mutants , all expressing either a 33-FLAG-tagged CdtB or 33-FLAG CdtB ( as a control for a nonsecreted protein ) , D1-22 and 24 hr after infection , cells were detached from 
the plate and lysed as described in Experimental Procedures . 
Lysates were centrifuged 5 min at 20,000 3 g , and the supernatants were ﬁltered through a 0.2 mm ﬁlter . 
Filtered supernatants ( representing the secreted fraction ) and pellets ( repre ¬ 
senting the bacterially associated fraction ) were analyzed by western immunoblotting with an antibody directed to the FLAG tag . 
The blot corresponding to the experiment with the strain expressing 33-FLAG CdtB was reprobed with an 
antibody to the intracellular protein RecA ( lower panel ) . 
( B ) Immunoﬂuorescence staining of cells infected with a strain of S. Typhi that encodes a 33-FLAG epitope-tagged CdtB . 
Henle-407 cells were in ¬ 
fected with a wild-type strain of S. Typhi encoding 33-FLAG epitope-tagged CdtB , and at different times after infection , cells were stained with a mouse monoclonal antibody directed to the FLAG epitope ( green ) and a rabbit antibody di ¬ 
rected to S. Typhi ( red ) and DAPI ( blue ) . 
Scale bar , 5 mm . 
( C ) Distribution of CdtB within infected cells after S. Typhi infection examined by differential staining . 
Cells were infected with a wild-type strain of 
S. Typhi expressing a chromosomally encoded 33-FLAG epitope-tagged CdtB . 
Twenty-four hours 
after infection , cells were ﬁxed with 4 % parafor-maldehyde and subjected to a differential staining protocol to distinguish extracellular from intracellular CdtB . 
Brieﬂy , ﬁxed cells were stained with a rabbit antibody directed to CdtB . 
Cells were permeabilized with 
0.3 % Triton X-100 , stained with a mouse monoclonal antibody directed to the FLAG epitope , and subsequently stained with Alexa 594-labeled anti-rabbit ( outside , red ) and Alexa 488-labeled anti-mouse ( inside , green ) IgG antibodies and DAPI to visualize DNA ( blue ) . 
Cells were observed under a ﬂuorescence microscope . 
Scale bar , 5 mm . 
( D ) Effect of DpltA and DpltB on the localization of CdtB after bacterial infection . 
Henle-407 cells were infected with a wild-type strain of S. Typhi or the mutant DpltA or DpltB derivatives and the corresponding complemented strains , all encoding 33-FLAG epitope-tagged CdtB . 
Twenty-four hours after infection , cells 
were stained with a mouse monoclonal antibody directed to the FLAG epitope ( green ) and a rabbit antibody directed to S. Typhi and visualized under a ﬂuorescence microscope . 
Scale bar , 5 mm . 
( Figure S7 ) . 
Furthermore , the amount of toxic activity recovered from cell culture supernatants could not have originated from the very small number of cells that could have lysed and escaped detection with our assays . 
In addition , toxicity of the DpltA mutant was not rescued by the addition of puriﬁed PltA to the in ¬ 
Cell culture supernatant contains cytolethal distending toxic activity . 
Henle-407 cells were infected with wild-type S. Typhi or its isogenic cdtB , pltA , or pltB mutant derivatives , and 24 hr after infection , culture supernatants were removed , ﬁltered , and applied to uninfected Henle-407 cells . 
Thirty hours after application of the different culture supernatants , the cells were examined by phase-contrast microscopy ( insets ) and processed to measure DNA content by ﬂow cytometry as indicated in the Experimental Procedures . 
The peaks corresponding to cells in G0-G1 , S , or G2 are indicated . 
Equivalent results were obtained in several repetitions of the same experiment . 
Scale bar , 50 mm . 
of the antibody did not block the production and intracellular transport of the CdtB toxin . 
These results indicate that the auto-crine and paracrine pathways are presumably the only mechanisms of delivery of CdtB into cells , and argue against a mechanism of delivery from the Salmonella-containing vacuole to the site of action in the nucleus without an extracellular stage . 
Exogenous Addition of Puriﬁed CdtB/PltA/PltB Complex Results in CDT Toxicity
Deletion of pltA or pltB resulted in lack of CdtB puncta throughout the infected cell and absence of CdtB-dependent toxicity in the culture medium of infected cells ( see Figure 3D and Figure 5 ) . 
These results implicated PltA and PltB in the export of CdtB from the Salmonella-containing vacuole but did not address the potential role of these proteins in the delivery of CdtB from the extracellular location . 
To address the potential role of PltA and PltB in the delivery of CdtB via the autocrine and paracrine pathways , we tested the toxicity of puriﬁed CdtB alone or in complex with puriﬁed PltA , PltB , or both . 
Addition of CdtB alone or in combination with only PltA or PltB did not result in any detect-able cytolethal distending toxicity ( Figure 7A ) . 
In contrast , cells treated with a combination of the three proteins showed prominent distension and cell-cycle arrest , which are the characteristic signs of cytolethal distending intoxication ( Figure 7A ) . 
These results indicate that PltA and PltB are required for the delivery of CdtB into target cells after its export from the toxin-producing infected cell . 
Figure 5 . 
CdtB Is Exported to the Extracellular Medium in a PltA / PltB-Dependent Manner 
DISCUSSION
Symbiotic and pathogenic bacteria that have sustained a prolonged association with their hosts have evolved very complex functional interfaces . 
Often , central to the shaping of these functional interfaces are bacterial proteins that have the capacity t modulate cellular functions , such as cytoskeleton dynamics , ve-sicular trafﬁcking , cell-cycle progression , and innate immune responses . 
Bacteria have evolved a variety of strategies to deliver those proteins to their site of action . 
In the simplest form , the bacterial proteins or toxins have , in their primary amino acid sequence , all the information necessary not only to modulate cellular functions but also to reach their destination within the target cell ( Just and Gerhard , 2004 ) . 
In other instances , the help of another protein or proteins ( i.e. , the `` B '' subunit ) is necessary to deliver the enzymatically active bacterial protein ( i.e. , the `` A '' subunit ) into the appropriate target cell ( Alouf , 2000 ) . 
Other delivery mechanisms utilize complex multiprotein machines ( e.g. , type III and type IV protein secretion systems ) to deliver groups of bacterial proteins to the appropriate target cell in a temporally and spatially coordinated manner ( Cascales and Christie , 2003 ; Galán and Wolf-Watz , 2006 ) . 
Here , we have described a mechanism that may help an intracellular pathogen to deliver a toxin to systemic sites . 
We have previously reported that S. Typhi encodes the `` A '' subunit homolog of the cytolethal distending toxin ( CDT ) but does not encode homologs of the `` B '' subunit components 
Cells ( A ) PltA interacts with PltB . 
PltA and PltB puriﬁed from inclusion bodies were refolded and run on 
a Superdex 75 HR gel ﬁltration column . 
Fractions were collected and separated by SDS-PAGE , and proteins were stained by Coomassie brilliant blue ( shown in lower panel ) . 
Upper panel shows the elution proﬁle of the column . 
( B ) CdtB forms a complex with PltA and PltB . 
PltA , PltB , and CdtB ( blue trace ) or CdtB alone ( red trace ) were loaded onto an ion exchange chroma-tography MonoQ column , and bound proteins were eluted with a 20 ml linear gradient of 0 to 
500 mM NaCl in the same sample buffer at a ﬂow rate of 1 ml/min . 
Fractions were collected , separated by SDS-PAGE , and proteins were stained by Coomassie brilliant blue ( shown in lower panel ) . 
The inset shows the input and ﬂow 
through material when the MonoQ column was loaded with CdtB alone , which , under these condi ¬ 
tions , does not bind the column ( see Experimental Procedures for details ) . 
( C ) CdtB colocalizeswithPltBduringbacterial infection.Henle-407 cellswereinfectedwith a strain of S.Typhiencoding33-FLAGepitope-taggedPltB and a 33-Myc 
epitope-tagged CdtB . 
Twenty-four hours after infection , cells were stained with a mouse monoclonal antibody directed to the FLAG epitope ( green ) , a rabbit polyclonal antibody to the Myc epitope ( red ) , and DAPI to stain the bacterial DNA ( blue ) . 
Stained cells were observed under a ﬂuorescence microscope . 
Scale bar , 5 mm . 
Figure 5 . 
CdtB Is Exported to the Extracellular Medium in a PltA / PltB-Dependent Manner 
Figure 6 . 
CdtB-Mediated Intoxication Occurs through PltA/PltB-Dependent Auto-crine and Paracrine Delivery Pathways ( A ) Exogenousapplication of a CdtB-neutralizing an-tibodyinhibitsCdtB-mediatedintoxicationafterbac - 
terial infection . 
Henle-407 cells were infected with wild-type S. Typhi or a cdtB mutant ( as a control ) , and 4 hr after infection , CdtB neutralizing antibody or the preimmune serum were added . 
Fifty-two hours after infection , the cells were examined by 
phase-contrast microscopy ( insets ) and processed to measure DNA content by ﬂow cytometry as indicated in the Experimental Procedures . 
The peaks corresponding to cells in G0-G1 , S , or G2 are indicated . 
Equivalent results were obtained in several 
repetitions of this experiment . 
Scale bar , 50 mm . 
( B ) Exogenous application of a CdtB-neutralizing antibody inhibits CdtB-mediated DNA damage . 
Henle-407 cells were infected with wild-type S. Typhi or a cdtB mutant in the presence or absence of a CdtB neutralizing antibody , and 30 hr after infection , cells were stained with a mouse monoclonal antibody directed to phosphorylated histone H2AX ( green ) to identify foci of DNA damage , a rabbit polyclonal antibody to S. Typhi ( red ) , and DAPI ( blue ) to stain DNA . 
Scale bar , 20 mm . 
( C ) Exogenous application of a CdtB-neutralizing antibody does not alter the intracellular distribution of CdtB . 
Henle-407 cells were infected with a S. Typhi strain 
encoding 33-FLAG epitope-tagged CdtB , and 4 hr after infection , CdtB neutralizing antibody or the preimmune serum ( as indicated ) were added . 
Twenty-four hours after infection , cells were stained with a mouse monoclonal antibody directed to the FLAG epitope ( green ) , a rabbit antibody directed to S. Typhi ( red ) , and DAPI ( blue ) to stain DNA . 
Scale bar , 5 mm . 
Figure 7 . 
Exogenous Addition of the CdtB/PltA/PltB Complex Results in Cytolethal Distending Toxicity 
( A ) Henle-407 cells were treated with 1 mg/ml total protein of puriﬁed CdtB , PltA , or PltB in different combinations as indicated , and 72 hr after treatment , the cells were examined under a phase microscope ( insets ) or processed to measure DNA content by ﬂow cytometry as indicated in the Experimen ¬ 
tal Procedures . 
The peaks corresponding to cells in G0-G1 , S , or G2 are indicated . 
Equivalent results were obtained in several repetitions of the same experiment . 
Coomassie-blue-stained SDS-PAGE of the preparations used in these studies are shown in each panel . 
( B ) Model for CdtB/PltA/PltB toxin delivery . 
After internalization ( I ) , S. Typhi reaches a compartment where expression of cdtB , pltA , and pltB can take place ( II ) . 
The CdtB/PltA/PltB complex is secreted from the bacteria into the lumen of the S. Typhi-containing vacuole , and it is recognized and packaged into 
transport carriers ( III ) . 
The complex is then transported to the plasma membrane and secreted to the extracellular medium ( IV ) from where it can target susceptible noninfected cells ( e.g. , cells of the immune system ) and induce DNA damage ( V ) . 
Infected cells that do not express a receptor for the toxin 
would be resistant to the toxin and provide a safe haven for the bacteria ( IV and V ) . 
( Haghjoo and Galán , 2004 ) . 
We also showed that cytolethal distending intoxication requires bacterial internalization into host cells . 
We have described here that in the same pathogenicity is-let , S. Typhi also encodes an active ADP-ribosyl transferase that is a homolog of the pertussis toxin ADP-ribosylating `` A '' subunit ( PltA ) . 
Interestingly , S. Typhi encodes just one homolog ( PltB ) of the ﬁve components of pertussis toxin heteropentameric `` B '' subunit . 
The presence of an `` A '' subunit homolog of a toxin with the absence of `` B '' subunit counterparts is reminiscent of S. Typhi CDT , which as discussed above , lacks homologs of its `` B '' subunit . 
Remarkably , we found that PltA/PltB is required for CdtB-mediated toxicity . 
Our studies indicate that such a role is independent of the enzymatic activity of PltA since a catalytic mutant of this toxin was competent for the delivery of CdtB . 
Rather , our results suggest that CdtB must associate with PltA/PltB to be engaged by the cellular transport machinery that eventually delivers this complex to the extracellular medium , presumably in a common transport carrier . 
Remarkably , we found that transport to the extracellular space is essential for CdtB intoxication , which occurs exclusively through autocrine or paracrine pathways . 
These conclusions are supported by the following observations : ( A ) CdtB colocalizes with PltA/PltB in structures visualized as puncta by immunoﬂuorescence , ( B ) CdtB-associated puncta most likely represent vesicles since they have a measurable buoyant density and can protect CdtB from protease treatment unless in the presence of detergent , ( C ) CdtB , its associated cytolethal distending toxicity , and PltA/B are found in the extracellular medium of infected epithelial cells , ( D ) addition of a neutralizing antibody effectively blocks toxicity both in infected and uninfected cells , and ( E ) in the absence of pltA or pltB , there is no CdtB-associated toxicity , no CdtB-associated puncta within cells , and no toxicity in the extracellular medium . 
We also found that both PltA and PltB are essential for CdtB delivery from the extracellular space since the CdtB/PltA/PltB complex , but not CdtB alone or in combination with either PltA or PltB , was readily toxic when added exogenously . 
Addition of the CdtB/PltA/PltB complex , however , did not lead to the detection of toxin-containing puncta in intoxicated cells ( data not shown ) , suggesting that the CdtB/PltA/PltB-associated puncta represent `` outgoing '' ( i.e. , on its way to the extracellular medium ) but not `` incoming '' ( i.e. , coming from the extracellular space ) toxin . 
Consistent with this hypothesis , addition of the neutralizing antibody did not block the formation of toxin-associated puncta , although it completely blocked intoxication . 
In essence , CdtB/PltA/PltB constitutes a tripartite exotoxin that we have named `` typhoid toxin . '' 
This toxin has two distinct biochemical activities , a DNAse activity associated with CdtB and an ADP-ribosylating activity associated with PltA . 
We hypothesize that evolution may have reshaped what may have originally been two independent toxins to combine them into one single tripartite toxin that is suited for its delivery from an intracellular location , and hence adapted to the biology of an intracellular pathogen . 
According to the model suggested by our results ( Figure 7B ) , after synthesis by intracellular bacteria , this toxin is subsequently exported to the extracellular space from where , in an autocrine and paracrine fashion , it can intoxicate not only bacterially-infected cells but also neighboring cells or even cells at systemic sites if transported to such locations . 
What advantages might this unusual delivery pathway confer to S. Typhi ? 
Unlike other S. enterica serovars , S. Typhi is known to persistently infect humans for extended periods of time and , if untreated , potentially for life . 
It is thought that S. Typhi establishes residence within an intracellular compartment ( presumably in the gall bladder ) although the speciﬁc cell type ( s ) in which it may reside has not been deﬁned ( House et al. , 2001 ; Parry et al. , 2002 ) . 
However , according to the model presented here , it is possible that infected cells lacking receptors for the toxin could provide a safe haven for the bacteria and at the same time serve as a source of toxin that could act on other cells and at systemic sites . 
Although the targets of the ADP-ribosylat-ing activity of PltA are unknown , CDT through the action of its active subunit CdtB , is known to hamper the activity of immune cells ( Lara-Tejero and Galán , 2002 ; Mooney et al. , 2001 ; Shenker et al. , 1999 ) . 
Therefore , the typhoid toxin activities , coupled to its unique delivery mechanism , may be critical for S. Typhi to establish persistent infection in the human host and avoid immune 
defenses . 
More studies will be required to clarify the mechanisms of toxin transport out of and into the cell , as well as to identify the cellular machinery involved in these steps . 
However , our results highlight the potentially dynamic nature of the S. Typhi-contain-ing vacuole , which does not seem to remain isolated from other cellular compartments but instead seems to be permissive for the delivery of bacterial products to other cellular compartments . 
In fact , such a dynamic behavior of a bacteria-containing vacu-ole has been previously reported for Mycobacterium tuberculosis , although in this case it was shown that bacterial lipids are transported outside of the bacteria-containing phagosome 
( Beatty et al. , 2000 ) . 
The dynamic nature of bacteria-containing phagosomes may have important implications for the interaction of intracellular microbial pathogens with the innate and acquired immune systems . 
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Plasmids, Bacterial Strains, Media, and Growth Conditions
The wild-type Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi strain ISP2825 has been described previously ( Galán and Curtiss , 1991 ) . 
Mutant strains carrying in-frame deletions or insertion mutations in cdtB , pltA , or pltB strains expressing chromosomally encoded 33-FLAG or 33-Myc tagged versions of these proteins or carrying the transcriptional reporter fusion pltA : : luc in the chromosome were constructed by standard recombinant DNA and allelic exchange procedures as previously described ( Kaniga et al. , 1994 ) . 
The pltA and pltB complementing plasmid was constructed by cloning a 1.6 kb DNA fragment comprising both open reading frames and 500 bp upstream of pltB , which includes the promoter region , in the BamHI site of the pACYC184 vector ( Chang an 
Cohen , 1978 ) . 
Plasmids expressing polyhistidine-tagged pltA , pltB , and cdtB were constructed by cloning the PCR-ampliﬁed genes into the pQE-60 vector ( QIAGEN ) . 
pltA , which carries a single amino acid substitution within its E133A catalytic site , was generated using the quick-change system ( Stratagene ) following the manufacturer 's instructions . 
S. Typhi strains were grown in LB broth containing 0.3 M NaCl at 37 C . 
When required , kanamycin ( 50 mg/ml ) , ampicil-lin ( 100mg/ml ) , and chloramphenicol ( 20 mg/ml ) were added . 
Cell Culture, Bacterial Infections, and Toxicity Assays
Henle-407 intestinal epithelial cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10 % bovine calf serum ( BCS ; HyClone ) . 
Overnight cultures of the different S. Typhi strains were diluted 1/20 in LB broth containing 0.3 M NaCl and grown until they reached an optical density measured at 600 nm ( OD600 ) of 1.0 . 
Cells were infected with the different strains of S. Typhi at a multiplicity of infections of 30 in HBSS . 
One and a half hours postinfection , cells were washed three times with HBSS and incubated for 1 hr in DMEM supplemented with 10 % BCS and gentamicin ( 100 mg/ml ) to kill extracellular bacteria . 
Cells were then washed , and fresh DMEM containing BCS and 5 mg/ml gentamicine was added to avoid cycles of reinfection . 
When appropriate , neutralizing or preimmune serum was added 4 hr after infection at a dilution of 1:50 . 
Cells were monitored for up to 3 days by phase-contrast microscopy for signs of toxicity or were processed for cell-cycle analysis as previously described ( Lara-Tejero and Galán , 2000 , 2001 ) . 
Cell-cycle proﬁles were analyzed with Watson Pragmatic algorithm in the FlowJo cytometry analysis software ( Three Star , Inc. , Ashland , OR ) . 
Protein Secretion Assay
Protein secretion after bacterial infection was assayed as previously described ( Collazo and Galán , 1997 ) . 
Brieﬂy , approximately 10 cells were infected with 7 wild-type S. Typhi or its isogenic DpltA or DpltB mutants , all expressing a 33-FLAG-tagged CdtB , and 24 hr after infection , cells were detached from the plate by adding 30 mg/ml proteinase K and lysed in 0.3 % Triton X-100 in PBS . 
Lysates were centrifuged 5 min at 20,000 3 g , and the supernatants were ﬁltered through a 0.2 mm ﬁlter . 
Filtered supernatants ( representing the secreted fraction ) and pellets ( representing the bacterially associated fraction ) were analyzed by western immunoblotting with an antibody directed to the FLAG tag . 
raphy . 
Luciferase Reporter Assay
Henle-407 cells were infected with the reporter strain of S. Typhi as indicated above . 
At different times after infection , cells were washed and lysed in Passive Lysis Buffer ( Promega Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System ) and then sonicated . 
Fireﬂy luciferase activity in lysates was measured using a luminometer as recommended by the manufacturer ( Promega ) . 
Cells processed and infected in parallel in identical fashion were lysed with 0.1 % deoxycholic acid , and dilutions of lysates were plated onto LB agar plates to determine the number of intracellular bacteria . 
Results were standardized based on the number of cfu . 
Received : May 23 , 2007 Revised : August 19 , 2007 Accepted : November 1 , 2007 Published : January 16 , 2008 
Immunoﬂuorescence Analysis
Infected cells were ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde , treated with 3 % BSA , 4 % goat serum , 0.3 % Triton X-100 , 50 mM NH4Cl in PBS , and labeled with the following primary antibodies : mouse monoclonal anti-FLAG M2 ( Sigma ; 1:10,000 dilution ) ; rabbit polyclonal anti-Myc ( Abcam ; 1:2,000 dilution ) ; and rabbit polyclonal anti-S . 
Typhi lipopolysaccharide ( Difco Laboratories ; 1:2,000 dilution ) , afﬁnity-puriﬁed rabbit antibody raised against recombinant CdtB/PltA/PltB complex ( 2 mg/ml ) . 
Secondary anti-rabbit and anti-mouse antibody conjugated to Alexa 488 or Alexa 594 were used at 1:2,000 dilution and 40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole ( DAPI ) was used at a concentration of 0.5 mg/ml . 
Images were acquired with an inverted microscope ( Eclipse TE2000-U ; Nikon ) equipped with a CCD camera ( MicroMAX RTE/CCD -1300 Y ; Princeton Instruments ) . 
Protein Puriﬁcation and Chromatography
Recombinant , polyhistidine-tagged PltA , PltB , or CdtB were expressed in E. coli , puriﬁed from inclusion bodies using nickel-afﬁnity chromatography under denaturing conditions ( 8 M urea ) , and refolded together as previously described ( Akeda and Galán , 2004 ) . 
Nonsoluble materials were removed by the different biological and chromatographic assays . 
The PltA-PltB complex was puriﬁed using a Superdex 75 HR column ( Amersham Pharmacia ) , equilibrated with 30 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 , 1 mM DTT , and 5 % glycerol , and run with a ﬂow rate of 0.3 ml/min . 
To investigate the PltA/PltB/CdtB complex formation , the MonoQ column ( Amersham Pharmacia ) was loaded with the refolded complex ( 0.5 mg of each puriﬁed protein ) ( or CdtB alone ) in a buffer containing 30 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8 , 1 mM DTT , and 5 % glycerol . 
Proteins were eluted with 20 ml of a linear gradient of 0 to 500 mM NaCl in the same sample buffer at a ﬂow rate of 1 ml/min . 
Antibody Production and Afﬁnity Puriﬁcation
The PltA/PltB/CdtB complex was puriﬁed on a Superdex 200 HR column ( Amersham Pharmacia ) and used to immunize rabbits following standard procedures ( Pocono Rabbit Farm and Laboratory , Canadensis , PA ) . 
For afﬁnity puriﬁcation , the PltA/PltB/CdtB complex was bound to a HiTrap NHS-acti-vated HP column ( GE Healthcare ) , and the antibody was puriﬁed according to the manufacturer 's instructions . 
In Vitro ADP-Ribosylation Assay
Postnuclear supernatants from Henle-407 cells ( 50 mg ) obtained by standard procedures were incubated with puriﬁed recombinant PltA ( 1 mg ) in a buffer containing 30 mM Tris-HCl pH8 , 1 mM DTT , and 50 mCi NAD - P in a ﬁnal vol-32 ume of 25 ml . 
The reaction mix was incubated for 1 hr at 37 C , stopped by heat inactivation for 15 min at 70 C , and trichloroacetic acid ( TCA ) was added to a ﬁnal concentration of 10 % in a ﬁnal volume of 200 ml . 
The precipitation mix was incubated on ice for 1 hr , centrifuged , and washed three times with acetone . 
The pellet was dried at room temperature , resuspended in loading buffer , and submitted to SDS-PAGE . 
The gel was dried and exposed for autoradiog ¬ 
Supplemental Data
The Supplemental Data include eight supplemental ﬁgures and can be found with this article online at http://www.cellhostandmicrobe.com/cgi/content/ full/3/1 / 30/DC1 / . 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank members of the Galán laboratory for critical review of this manu-script . 
S.S. and J.U. were supported by fellowships from the Fuller and Pew Foundations , respectively . 
This work was supported by Public Health Service Grant AI055472 to J.E.G. 
REFERENCES 
Akeda , Y. , and Galán , J.E. ( 2004 ) . 
Genetic analysis of the Salmonella enterica type III secretion-associated ATPase InvC deﬁnes discrete functional domains . 
J. Bacteriol . 
186 , 2402 -- 2412 . 
Alouf , J. ( 2000 ) . 
Bacterial protein toxins : An overview . 
Methods Mol . 
Biol . 
145 , 1 -- 26 . 
Beatty , W.L. , Rhoades , E.R. , Ullrich , H.J. , Chatterjee , D. , Heuser , J.E. , and Russell , D.G. ( 2000 ) . 
Trafﬁcking and release of mycobacterial lipids from infected macrophages . 
Trafﬁc 1 , 235 -- 247 . 
Burns , D. ( 2003 ) . 
Type IV transporters of pathogenic bacteria . 
Curr . 
Opin . 
Microbiol . 
6 , 29 -- 34 . 
Cascales , E. , and Christie , P.J. ( 2003 ) . 
The versatile bacterial type IV secretion systems . 
Nat . 
Rev. Microbiol . 
1 , 137 -- 149 . 
Chang , A.C.Y. , and Cohen , S.N. ( 1978 ) . 
Construction and characterization of ampliﬁable multicopy DNA cloning vehicles derived from the p15A cryptic min-iplasmid . 
J. Bacteriol . 
134 , 1141 -- 1155 . 
Collazo , C. , and Galán , J.E. ( 1997 ) . 
The invasion-associated type III system of Salmonella typhimurium directs the translocation of Sip proteins into the host 
Deng , W. , Liou , S.R. , Plunkett , G. , III , Mayhew , G.F. , Rose , D.J. , Burland , V. , Kodoyianni , V. , Schwartz , D.C. , and Blattner , F.R. ( 2003 ) . 
Comparative geno-mics of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi strains Ty2 and CT18 . 
J. Bacteriol . 
185 , 2330 -- 2337 . 
Edwards , R. , Olsen , G. , and Maloy , S. ( 2002 ) . 
Comparative genomics of closely related salmonellae . 
Trends Microbiol . 
10 , 94 -- 99 . 
Farizo , K. , Huang , T. , and Burns , D. ( 2000 ) . 
Importance of holotoxin assembly in Ptl-mediated secretion of pertussis toxin from Bordetella pertussis . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
68 , 4049 -- 4054 . 
Galán , J.E. , and Curtiss , R. , III . 
( 1991 ) . 
Distribution of the invA , - B , - C , and - D genes of Salmonella typhimurium among other Salmonella serovars : invA mutants of Salmonella typhimurium are deﬁcient for entry into mammalian cells . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
59 , 2901 -- 2908 . 
Galán , J.E. , and Wolf-Watz , H. ( 2006 ) . 
Protein delivery into eukaryotic cells by type III secretion machines . 
Nature 444 , 567 -- 573 . 
Haghjoo , E. , and Galán , J.E. ( 2004 ) . 
Salmonella typhi encodes a functional cytolethal distending toxin that is delivered into host cells by a bacterial-inter-nalization pathway . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 101 , 4614 -- 4619 . 
House , D. , Bishop , A. , Parry , C. , Dougan , G. , and Wain , J. ( 2001 ) . 
Typhoid fever : Pathogenesis and disease . 
Curr . 
Opin . 
Infect . 
Dis . 
14 , 573 -- 578 . 
Ivanoff , B. , Levine , M. , and Lambert , P. ( 1994 ) . 
Vaccination against typhoid fever : Present status . 
Bull . 
World Health Organ . 
72 , 957 -- 971 . 
Just , I. , and Gerhard , R. ( 2004 ) . 
Large clostridial cytotoxins . 
Rev. Physiol . 
Biochem . 
Pharmacol . 
152 , 23 -- 47 . 
Kaniga , K. , Bossio , J.C. , and Galán , J.E. ( 1994 ) . 
The Salmonella typhimurium invasion genes invF and invG encode homologues to the PulD and AraC family of proteins . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
13 , 555 -- 568 . 
Kaslow , H. , and Burns , D. ( 1992 ) . 
Pertussis toxin and target eukaryotic cells : Binding , entry , and activation . 
FASEB J. 6 , 2684 -- 2690 . 
Lara-Tejero , M. , and Galán , J.E. ( 2000 ) . 
A bacterial toxin that controls cell cycle progression as a deoxyribonuclease I-like protein . 
Science 290 , 354 -- 357 . 
Lara-Tejero , M. , and Galán , J.E. ( 2001 ) . 
CdtA , CdtB , and CdtC form a tripartite complex that is required for cytolethal distending toxin activity . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
69 , 4358 -- 4365 . 
Lara-Tejero , M. , and Galán , J.E. ( 2002 ) . 
Cytolethal distending toxin : Limited 
damage as a strategy to modulate cellular functions . 
Trends Microbiol . 
10 , 147 -- 152 . 
Lowndes , N.F. , and Toh , G.W. ( 2005 ) . 
DNA repair : The importance of phosphorylating histone H2AX . 
Curr . 
Biol . 
15 , R99 -- R102 . 
Mooney , A. , Clyne , M. , Curran , T. , Doherty , D. , Kilmartin , B. , and Bourke , B. ( 2001 ) . 
Campylobacter upsaliensis exerts a cytolethal distending toxin effect on HeLa cells and T lymphocytes . 
Microbiology 147 , 735 -- 743 . 
Parkhill , J. , Dougan , G. , James , K.D. , Thomson , N.R. , Pickard , D. , Wain , J. , Churcher , C. , Mungall , K.L. , Bentley , S.D. , Holden , M.T. , et al. ( 2001 ) . 
Complete genome sequence of a multiple drug resistant Salmonella enterica sero-var Typhi CT18 . 
Nature 413 , 848 -- 852 . 
Parry , C. , Hien , T.T. , Dougan , G. , White , N. , and Farrar , J. ( 2002 ) . 
Typhoid fever . 
N. Engl . 
J. Med . 
347 , 1770 -- 1782 . 
Shenker , B. , McKay , T. , Datar , S. , Miller , M. , Chowhan , R. , and Demuth , D. 
( 1999 ) . 
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans immunosuppressive protein is a member of the family of cytolethal distending toxins capable of causing a G2 arrest in human T cells . 
J. Immunol . 
162 , 4773 -- 4780