Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) are gastrointestinal tract of the young adult. Such conditions are characterized by chronic inﬂammation, mucosal damage, and epithelial cell destruction resulting from a complex interplay among genetic, immunologic, and mi- crobial factors. Unlike UC, in which inﬂammation is limited to the mucosa, the inﬂammation that occurs during CD is transmural and granulomatous, and affects not only the intestinal mucosa but also the muscularis and serosa. Although inﬂammatory changes in intestinal physiology cause much of the symptomatology associ- ated with CD, signiﬁcant morbidity results from the irreversible tissue injury and ﬁbrosis that frequently oc- cur as a common complication.1,2 In fact, more than one third of patients with CD develop a distinct ﬁbrostenos- ing phenotype that results in recurrent intestinal stric- ture formation.3 healing response to injury.4 For reasons that remain unclear, the reparative process associated with CD progresses uncontrollably, leading to the proliferation of mesenchymal cells and the unrestrained deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM).2,5 Abnormal contraction of this ECM leads to scar formation and tissue distortion. Ultimately, this ﬁbrotic process thickens the wall of the gut, reducing ﬂexibility and narrowing the bowel lumen, frequently resulting in obstructive strictures.2,5,6 In intes- tinal ﬁbrosis, mechanisms to degrade ECM are seemingly not operative at appropriate levels and ﬁbrogenic cells are not only maintained but expanded in number. This is most likely caused by an imbalance between the synthesis of matrix and its degradation by matrix metalloprotein- ases (MMP).4,7 Furthermore, CD is characterized by hy- perplasia of the muscle layers and in severely ﬁbrotic areas there is a change in smooth muscle cells toward a ﬁbrogenic phenotype.8 proliferation of mesenchymal cells, are key contribu- tory factors to stricture development, a hallmark fea- ture of intestinal ﬁbrosis is that strictures characteris- tically display thickening of all layers of the intestinal wall (Figure 1). Histologically, areas of ﬁbrosis are life-long, relapsing illnesses that primarily affect the Fibrosis in CD is believed to result from an overzealous Although excessive ECM depositions, as well as the
principally composed of islands of smooth muscle cells in the submucosa that are associated with dense collagen deposition , and disruption and expansion of the muscularis mucosa . 
Collagen appears to be the major ECM component associated with intestinal ﬁbrosis and a number of subtypes , each with different functions have been identiﬁed .2 -- 4,9 In normal intestine , the major collagen subtypes are type 1 ( 70 % ) , type III ( 20 % ) , and type V ( 12 % ) , whereas in intestinal ﬁbrosis there is an increase in total collagen ( types I , III , IV , and V ) in addition to perhaps the speciﬁc and relative increase of types III and V. Furthermore , collagen type I is the predominant collagen subtype found at sites of stricture . 
In addition , thickening of the muscularis layers ( muscularis overgrowth ) seems to be associated with an increase in the number of vimentin-positive ( V ) cells in areas of ﬁbrosis .3,4 In severely ﬁbrotic tissue , entire layers of histologically normal muscularis are populated largely by V / - smooth muscle actin ( A ) -- and V / A ﬁbroblasts rather than normal V / A smooth muscle cells . 
This suggests that muscularis overgrowth in CD involves a change in enteric smooth muscle cells toward a ﬁbroblast or myoﬁbro-blast phenotype . 
tion of CD since more than half of all procedures in patients with CD are performed to relieve intestinal obstruction . 
Surgery is rarely curative ; 70 % of patients have endoscopic evidence of stricture recurrence at 1 year , and at 4 years , 40 % have symptomatic recurrence that requires further intervention .3,10 -- 13 Despite advances in CD management over the past 25 years , the incidence of strictures and the requirement for intes-tinal resection have not diminished .3 This largely re-ﬂects our limited understanding of the molecular mechanisms that underlie intestinal ﬁbrogenesis . 
The current mechanistic framework proposes that stricture formation is promoted , in part , by ﬁbroblast overexpression of adhesion molecules , such as intracellular adhesion molecule-1 and proﬁbrotic growth factors . 
For example , the transforming growth factor ( TGF ) - family plays a universal role in the development of ﬁbrosis with the TGF - 1 subtype , speciﬁcally being implicated in pathogenic ﬁbrosis .2,6,14 Overexpression of TGF - and its receptors in both the intestinal wall and in ﬁbroblast cultures taken from sites of intestinal stricture in patients with CD suggests a regulatory role for this cytokine in intestinal ﬁbrogenesis .15,16 These studies suggest that active TGF - 1 causes ﬁbrosi Intestinal ﬁbrosis presents a signiﬁcant complica-through the induction of connective tissue growth factor ( CTGF ) . 
In turn , collagen production is positively regulated by TGF - 1 , insulin growth factor-1 , and CTGF , whereas matrix degradation is restrained by the ability of TGF - 1 to inhibit the expression of MMP-1 and -3 and to stimulate tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases . 
to intestinal ﬁbrosis and stricture formation are rather incomplete . 
This is because mechanistic studies of ﬁbrosis are difﬁcult to perform in humans . 
Furthermore , despite the large number of murine models of inﬂammatory bowel disease currently available , such models have so far proven of little use in studying the pathogenesis of stricture formation because they are accompanied by limited intestinal ﬁbrosis . 
Rats have been shown to develop ﬁbrosis after injection of pep-tidoglycan-polysaccharide into their gut walls , and after repeated bouts of trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid ( TNBS ) colitis .17,18 However , although mice are more resistant to developing ﬁbrotic disease than any other species ,4 the number of research tools available makes the mouse the most desirable animal species to model human disease and test therapies . 
Progress has been made within the past 5 years as models of intestinal ﬁbrosis in mice have increased in the literature . 
For example , intestinal ﬁbrosis in mice has been shown to occur after repeated induction of TNBS colitis19 and after adenoviral gene transfer and overexpression of TGF - 120 and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 ( MCP-1 ) in the colon .21 Despite these advances , such models are inadequate because they are labor intensive , To date , the knowledge of the mechanisms that lead lead to frequent mortality , and the ﬁbrosis can vary in the intensity and position within the gastrointestinal tract . 
Although the overexpression of ﬁbrotic cytokines has proven useful in determining their potential role in ﬁbrosis , these models are further limited in their ability to address how ﬁbrotic processes develop following inﬂammatory events . 
describe a mouse model of severe and persistent intes-tinal ﬁbrosis that mimics the pathology seen in Crohn 's patients and trumps all previous models ( Figure 1 ) . 
This model is unique in that the intestinal ﬁbrosis is initiated by a bacteria-induced colitis . 
In this model , Grassl et al pretreated mice with 20 mg/ml streptomycin 24 hours before oral infection with Sal-monella enterica serovar Typhimurium ( S typhimurium ) , an intracellular bacterial pathogen that is responsible for causing food poisoning and gastroenteritis in humans . 
Mice are more resistant to the development of gastroenteritis phenotype and , after oral inoculation with S typhimurium , mice typically experience symptoms of typhoid fever . 
However , when mice are pretreated with streptomycin before infection with S typhimurium , the resulting enteric phase of the infection is far more successful , leading to heavy colonization of the cecum and colon with signiﬁcant colitis . 
important advances . 
First , the study documents that infection with S typhimurium leads to chronic infection and colitis in association with extensive transmural ECM deposition within the cecum and colon . 
For instance , at early time points after infection with In this issue of GASTROENTEROLOGY , Grassl et al22 The ﬁndings reported by Grassl et al detail two typhimurium ( day 7 ) , the ﬁbrosis spanned the entire cecal wall , whereas from day 21 postinfection and onward to day 40 , the ﬁbrosis was mainly localized to the muscle layers and the submucosa . 
Remarkably , although such observations have been made in CD , S typhimurium infections in humans are not associated with intestinal ﬁbrosis . 
In addition , ﬁbrosis and extensive transmural inﬂammation was noted along the entire length of the colon , with the most severe and extensive ﬁbrosis found in the cecum . 
With such consistent localization of ﬁbrotic areas , it is hoped that this model may serve to aid future investigation of mechanisms underlying the ﬁbrotic response . 
often exhibits extensive damage to the epithelium and underlying tissues along with the expression of a characteristic cytokine proﬁle dominated by interleukin ( IL ) -1 , IL-17 , tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) - , and interferon ( IFN ) - . 
In keeping with this proﬁle , the second signiﬁcant ﬁnding of the Grassl et al22 model is that TNF - , IFN - , MCP-1 , and IL-17 were detected in the S typhimurium-infected cecae in concert with transmural inﬁltration of inﬂammatory and immune cells . 
The increased expression of Th-1 cytokines in this model was also accompanied by an increased expression of proﬁbrotic growth factors , such as TGF - 1 , CTGF , and IGF-1 . 
TGF - 1 and IGF-1 are both potent inducers of collagen type I , which were strongly up-regulated in the submucosa and external muscle layers of the infected cecae . 
Examination of the cell types in areas marked by ﬁbrosis further revealed that the majority of the cells were A / desmin ( D ) , identifying them as ﬁbroblasts . 
Regions rich in ﬁbroblasts also correlated to areas of strong collagen deposition , suggesting that , in this model , ﬁbroblasts are the chief producers of collagen . 
Again , this observation is consistent with the fact that ﬁbroblasts seem to be the predominant mesenchymal cell type within ﬁbrotic tissues associated with CD . 
Strong collagen staining also appeared adjacent to V A D cells ( smooth muscle ) and V A cells ( putative myoﬁbroblast cells ) . 
brosis established by Grassl et al22 introduces a novel mouse model of chronic colitis and intestinal ﬁbrosis that mimics many of the features of CD-induced ﬁ-brosis . 
In addition , for those who study intestinal ﬁbrosis , one should be encouraged by this model for its apparent ease of induction , reproducibility , and a much more manageable time frame to monitor ﬁbrotic illness . 
However , like any new model system , many questions remain to be answered : Can this model be manipulated by intervention ? 
What knowledge can be gained from the study of bacterial virulence factors and strategies , which are apparently necessary to initiate both chronic inﬂammation and the ﬁbrosis ? 
Will this model offer a nexus toward mechanistic study ? 
During active clinical disease , the affected gut tissue Thus , this bacterial-induced model of intestinal ﬁ ¬ 
Nevertheless , this is an important contribution and represents an exciting signiﬁcant advance for the study of intestinal ﬁbrosis . 
10 . 
Rutgeerts P , Geboes K , Vantrappen G , et al. . 
Natural history of 11 . 
Rutgeerts P , Geboes K , Vantrappen G , et al. . 
Predictability of the 12 . 
Whelan G , Farmer RG , Fazio VW , et al. . 
Recurrence after surgery 13 . 
Dietz DW , Laurerti S , Strong SA , et al. . 
Safety and long term 14 . 
McKaig BC , Hughes K , Tighe PJ , et al. . 
Differential expression of 15 . 
diMola FF , Friess H , Scheuren A , et al. . 
Transforming growth 16 . 
diMola FF , DiSebastiano P , Gardini A , et al. . 
Differential expres-17 . 
van Tol EA , Holt L , Li Fl , et al. . 
Bacterial cell wall polymers References 1 . 
Becker JM . 
Surgical therapy for ulcerative colitis and Crohn 's disease . 
Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1999 ; 28:371 -- 390 . 
2 . 
Graham MF . 
Pathogenesis of intestinal strictures in Crohn 's disease : an update . 
Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 1995 ; 1:220 -- 227 . 
3 . 
Burke JP , Muslow JJ , O'Keane C , et al. . 
Fibrogenesis in Crohn 's disease . 
Am J Gastroenterol 2007 ; 102:439 -- 448 . 
4 . 
Pucilowska J , Williams KL , Lund PK . 
Fibrogenesis IV . 
Fibrosis and inﬂammatory bowel disease : cellular mediators and animal models . 
Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000 ; 279 : G653 -- G659 . 
5 . 
Geboes KP , Cabooter L , Geboes K. Contribution of morphology for the comprehension of mechanisms of ﬁbrosis in inﬂammatory enterocolitis . 
Acta Gastroenterol Belg 2000 ; 63:371 -- 376 . 
6 . 
Assche GV . 
Can we inﬂuence ﬁbrosis in Crohn 's disease ? 
Acta Gastroenterol Belg 2001 ; 64:193 -- 196 . 
7 . 
Schuooan D , Hahn EG . 
MMPs in the gut : inﬂammation hits the matrix . 
Gut 2000 ; 47:12 -- 14 . 
8 . 
Pucilowska JB , McNaughton KK , Mohapatra NK , et al. . 
IGF-1 and procollagen alpha 1 are coexpressed in a subset of mesenchymal cells in active Crohn 's disease . 
Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000 ; 279 : G1307 -- G1322 . 
9 . 
Matthes H , Herbst H , Schuppan D , et al. . 
Cellular localization of procollagen gene transcripts in inﬂammatory bowel diseases . 
Gastroenterology 1992 ; 102:431 -- 442 . 
recurrent Crohn 's disease at the ileocolonic anastomosis after curative surgery . 
Gut 1984 ; 25:665 -- 672 . 
postoperative cause of Crohn 's disease . 
Gastroenterology 1990 ; 99:956 -- 963 . 
in Crohn 's disease . 
Relationship to localization of disease ( clinical pattern ) and surgical indication . 
Gastroenterology 1985 ; 88 : 1826 -- 1833 . 
efﬁcacy of strictureplasty in 314 patients with obstructing small bowel Crohn 's disease . 
J Am Cell Surg 2001 ; 192:330 -- 337 . 
TGF-beta isoforms by normal and inﬂammatory bowel disease intestinal myoﬁbroblasts . 
Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2002 ; 282 : C172 -- C182 . 
factor-betas and their signaling receptors are coexpressed in Crohn 's disease . 
Ann Surg 1999 ; 229 : 67 -- 75 . 
sion of connective tissue growth factor in inﬂammatory bowel disease . 
Digestion 2004 ; 69:245 -- 253 . 
promote intestinal ﬁbrosis by direct stimulation of myoﬁbro-blasts . 
Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 1999 ; 227 : G245 -- G255 
18 . 
Moris GP , Beck PL , Herridge MJ , et al. . 
Hapten-induced model of 19 . 
Lawrance IC , Wu F , Leite AZ , et al. . 
A murine model of chronic 20 . 
Vallance BA , Gunawan MI , Hewlett B , et al. . 
TGF-beta1 gene 21 . 
Motomura Y , Khan WI , El-Sharkawy RT , et al. . 
Induction of a chronic inﬂammation and ulceration in the rat colon . 
Gastroenterology 2003 ; 125:1750 -- 1761 . 
inﬂammation-induced intestinal ﬁbrosis down-regulated by antisense NF-kappa B. Gastroenterology 2003 ; 125:1750 -- 1761 . 
transfer to the mouse colon leads to intestinal ﬁbrosis . 
Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005 ; 289 : G116 -- G128 . 
ﬁbrogenic response in mouse colon by overexpression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 . 
Gut 2006 ; 55:662 -- 670 . 
R ho GTPase and Wnt / - catenin signaling pathways quently activated in human hepatocarcinogenesis . 
Rho GTPases and the Wnt / - catenin pathway regulate multiple cellular processes , including cell polarity , proliferation , differentiation , and apoptosis . 
A functional role of Wnt / - catenin activation in hepatocarcinogenesis has been demonstrated in genetic mouse models . 
In this issue of GASTROENTEROLOGY , van Hengel et al1 provide ﬁrst experimental evidence that hepatic deletion of the gene encoding the Rho GTPase -- Cdc42 -- induces chronic liver damage and hepatocarcinogenesis in mice . 
way occurs in 20 % -- 90 % of human hepatocellular carcinomas ( HCC ) .2 Different mechanisms induce Wnt / - catenin signaling during hepatocarcinogenesis , including ( 1 ) activating mutations of - catenin3 ,4 ; ( 2 ) inactivation of negative regulators of - catenin like Axin-1 , Axin-2 ,5,6 GSK-3 ,7 and Prickle-1 ; 8 and ( 3 ) overexpression of the Wnt receptor , frizzled-7 .9 Genetic mouse models have provided experimental evidence that deletion of adenomatosis polyposis coli ( a negative regulator of - catenin ) can induce hepatocarcinogenesis .10 However , hepatic expression of - catenin overactive mutants by itself is not sufﬁcient to induce fully malignant tumors in the mouse liver ,11,12 but cooperates with other oncogenic stimuli , such as H-ras activation , to promote hepatocarcinogenesis in mice .13 are interconnected and both pathways are fre-Wnt / - catenin-signaling . 
Activation of this path ¬ 
22 . 
Grassl GA , Valdez Y , Bergstrom KSB , et al. . 
Chronic enteric Sal-monella infection in mice leads to severe and persistent intestinal ﬁbrosis . 
Gastroenterology 2008 ; 134:768 -- 780 . 
ment of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition , Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School , 114 16th Street ( 114-3503 ) , Charlestown , Massachusetts 02129 . 
e-mail : mccormic@helix.mgh . 
harvard.edu ; fax : (617) 726-4172 . 
Address requests for reprints to : Beth A. McCormick , PhD , Depart - © 2008 by the AGA Institute 0016-5085/08 / $ 34.00 doi :10.1053 / j.gastro .2008.01.019 tion of - catenin , thereby inducing cell proliferation via activation of cyclin-D and myc , among other targets . 
However , Wnt signaling has additional effects that could contribute to cancer formation , including the activation of genes involved in glutamine metabolism like glutamine synthetase14 and the control of cytoskeleton organization , cell-to-cell adhesion , cell polarity , and cell motility .15 These latter effects can also involve Rho GTPase signaling .16,17 ily of small GTPases controlling cell polarity , motility , differentiation , apoptosis , and proliferation . 
The activation of Rho GTPases has been implicated in various types of human cancer .18 There is growing evidence that activation of Rho GTPases by guanine nucleotide exchange factors occurs in human hepatocarcinogenesis . 
GTPase-activating proteins ( GAPs ) inactivate Rho GTPases . 
Recent studies have identiﬁed 2 GAP genes that are frequently deleted in human liver cancer ( DLC-1 and DLC-2 ) . 
Both gene products display GAP activity against RhoA and Cdc42 ( 2 members of the Rho family GTPases ) and suppress cell proliferation upon reintroduction in hepa-toma cells .18,19 DLC-2 is deleted in 30 % -- 50 % of human HCC20 and DLC-1 in 44 % -- 50 % of human HCC .21 In addition , p21-activated protein kinase ( Pak1 ) , one of the main downstream effectors of Cdc42 , is overexpressed in 75 % of human HCC .22 The overexpression of Pak1 in human HCC correlates with activation of c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase ( JNK ) , suggesting that induction of JNK by Cdc4223 could contribute to hepatocarcinogenesis . 
Experiments in mouse models have established that c-Jun promotes hepatocyte survival in the context of chronic hepatitis and early HCC formation .24,2 Activation of Wnt-signaling results in nuclear localiza-Rho family GTPases . 
Rho GTPases are a subfam ¬