Growth control in the Salmonella-containing vacuole
Salmonella enterica is an intracellular bacterial pathogen that inhabits membrane-bound vacuoles of eukaryotic cells . 
Coined as the ` Salmonella-containing vacuole ' ( SCV ) , this compartment has been studied for two decades as a replicative niche . 
Recent ﬁndings reveal , however , marked differences in the lifestyle of bacteria enclosed in the SCV of varied host cell types . 
In ﬁbroblasts , the emerging view supports a model of bacteria facing in the SCV a ` to grow ' or ` not to grow ' dilemma , which is solved by entering in a dormancy-like state . 
Finetuning of host cell defense/survival routes , drastic metabolic shift down , adaptation to hypoxia conditions , and attenuation of own virulence systems emerge as strategies used by Salmonella to intentionally reduce the growth rate inside the SCV . 
Francisco Garcıa-del Portillo, Cristina Núñez-Hernández, Blanca Eisman and José Ramos-Vivas
Addresses
Departamento de Biotecnologıa Microbiana , Centro Nacional de Biotecnologıa , Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientıﬁcas ( CSIC ) , Darwin 3 , 28049 Madrid , Spain 
Introduction
Pathogens replicate and propagate in susceptible hosts . 
In most cases , extensive replication is , however , not required to ensure dissemination . 
In fact , many successful pathogens displaying high infection rates prevent overt damage and coexist with the host for long-lasting ( even life-long ) periods . 
Bacterial pathogens with such ability include Mycobacterium tuberculosis , Helicobacter pylori , and Salmonella enterica [ 1 -- 3 ] . 
Host defenses , intricate strat-egies developed by the pathogen , or a combination of both , ultimately impact the capacity of the pathogen to proliferate in host tissues . 
How pathogens attenuate their replication rate in host tissues is still poorly understood , though some mechanistic details start to emerge . 
For example , hypoxia and nitric oxide ( NO ) production by the host predispose M. tuberculosis for entering a nonre-plicative dormant state in lung granulomas . 
Two bacterial kinase proteins , DevS and DevT , act as hypoxia and redox sensors to activate a cognate response regulator , DevR , which ultimately reprograms gene expression to initiate dormancy [ 4,5 ] . 
S. enterica has necessarily evolved mechanisms to restrain growth in the host . 
This pathogen causes gastroenteritis and systemic diseases in humans and animals but is often associated with asymptomatic infections . 
At the cellular level , S. enterica lives within membrane-bound vacuoles and causes acute and long-lasting infections by surviving and replicating preferentially in macrophages [ 6,7 ] . 
Other cells targeted during the infection are epithelial , dendri-tic , and ﬁbroblast-like cells . 
To establish a chronic infection , different genes are used by the pathogen at deﬁned stages [ 8 ] . 
In this complex scenario , temporal and spatial modeling of the Salmonella-containing vacuole ( SCV ) is expected to occur . 
This review summarizes recent ﬁndings revealing marked differences in the SCV of diverse host cell types . 
Unlike the evidence found in other nonphagocytic cell types , S. enterica produces a long-lasting infection inside the SCV of ﬁbroblasts with very limited , if any , proliferation ( Figure 1 ) [ 9 ] . 
Recent transcriptome assays have shed light on how this unique lifestyle may have evolved . 
Interestingly , some of the unveiled new traits resemble those of the M. tuberculosis dormancy state [ 10 ] . 
Salmonella , vacuoles , cytosol , and autophagy 
The SCV has been intensively studied in tissue culture models [ 11 -- 13 ] . 
Except in dendritic cells and ﬁbroblasts , intravacuolar bacteria have been shown to replicate inside the SCV . 
Intriguingly , S. enterica does not undergo many replication rounds within the cells of animal tissues , neither in acute nor in chronic infections ( reviewed in [ 12 ] ) . 
This picture implies the probable existence of mechanisms restricting replication , but not survival , of bacteria located inside the SCV . 
After 24 hours of infection , increases of no higher than twofold to threefold in intracellular wild-type bacteria are usually observed in ﬁbroblasts [ 12 ] . 
However , bacterial mutants defective in certain functions , like the virulence regulatory system PhoP -- PhoQ , overgrow in the SCV ( Figure 1 ) . 
Fibroblasts therefore exemplify a niche in which S. enterica probably adapts to an environment not supporting active growth . 
The view of the SCV as a compartment supporting only limited bacterial growth is not exclusive of ﬁbroblasts . 
A 
Distinct modes of Salmonella growth inside different nonphagocytic cell types . 
Shown is a comparison of the Salmonella lifestyle inside epithelial cells and fibroblasts . 
Intracellular bacteria initiate the infection enclosed in the Salmonella-containing vacuole ( SCV ) . 
In epithelial cells , this compartment is further modeled ( 1 ) to sustain bacterial proliferation ( 2 ) . 
Salmonella replicates , however , at higher rates in the cytosol of epithelial cells , showing a characteristic larger cell size as it has been shown for wild-type or sifA strains ( 3 ) . 
In epithelial cells , no differences have been reported in the phenotypes of wild-type and phoP bacteria . 
In fibroblasts , wild-type bacteria adapt to a nonproliferative state inside the SCV ( 4 ) . 
By contrast , mutants with an inactive PhoP -- PhoQ system overgrow inside the SCV upon the infection of this particular cell type ( 5 ) . 
A proportion of SCV ( damaged ) and cytosolic bacteria is proposed to be targeted by the autophagic system and ubiquitinated proteins in both cell types ( 6 ) . 
The significance of these later processes for the control of Salmonella intracellular growth remains to be determined . 
Relevant to the control of Salmonella intracellular growth is the action of host ( TBK-1 ) and bacterial ( SifA ) proteins that ensure integrity of the SCV membrane . 
Very recently , the AKT-1 ( Akt ) kinase has also been implicated in preventing fusion of the SCV with lysosomes of epithelial cells , promoting bacterial replication in this way . 
This later model , however , contrasts with the elevated rate of interaction with the endolysosomal system shown for the SCV in HeLa epithelial cells . 
defect in SifA , a bacterial protein secreted by the type-III secretion system encoded in the pathogenicity island-2 ( SPI-2 TTSS ) , results in release of many intravacuolar bacteria to the cytosol [ 14,15 ] . 
Lack of SifA has consequences for growth since bacteria replicate at higher rates in the cytosol than inside the SCV of epithelial cells . 
Wild-type bacteria ( 0.7 -- 24 % , depending on the study ) have also been claimed to reside in the cytosol upon release from damaged SCV [ 14,15 ] . 
The in vivo signiﬁcance of this vacuole-to-cytosol transition and the subsequent massive cytosolic replication remain , however , elusive . 
Thus , though S. enterica replicates efﬁciently in animal tissues during an acute infection , such process occurs essentially by net increase in infection foci rather than by undergoing massive replication within cells [ 16 ] . 
Recently , it has been shown that TANK-binding kinase 1 ( TBK-1 ) , a host factor involved in type-I interferon responses mediating antiviral-defense , preserves the integrity of the SCV [ 17 ] . 
tbk1 ( / ) embryonic ﬁbro-blasts contain more intracellular bacteria , predominantly located in the cytosol . 
This increase in bacterial load occurs in different cell types in which TBK-1 was knocked out ( epithelial , ﬁbroblasts , and macrophages ) as well as in tbk1 ( / ) ﬁbroblasts infected with other pathogens as Streptococcus pyogenes and pathogenic Escher-ichia coli [ 17 ] . 
These results are in line with the data obtained with the sifA mutant and favor the hypothesis that the SCV environment , in spite of supporting bacterial growth in certain cell types , could be more restrictive than the host cell cytosol . 
Recent work has shown that in epithelial cells the autop-hagosomal marker LC3 ( light chain 3 ) colocalizes with intracellular S. enterica , and that such event peaks at onehour postinfection [ 18 ] . 
Most bacteria having LC3-label-ing retain colocalization with SCV-membrane proteins as Lamp-1 , which suggests that damaged ( perforated ) SCVs are rapidly targeted by the autophagic system [ 19 ] . 
Perforation of the SCV membrane could be accomplished by the invasion-associated type-III secretion apparatus encoded in the pathogenicity island-1 ( SPI-1 TSS ) [ 20 ] , which remains active in intracellular bacteria . 
However , only 20 % of the SCV is surrounded by LC3 in infected epithelial cells displaying maximal autophagic activity [ 19 ] . 
So , it remains to be demonstrated whether bacteria enclosed in the SCV of epithelial cells subvert autophagy or not . 
In macrophages , S. enterica induces autophagy and cell death by injecting SipB , an effector protein secreted by SPI-1 TTSS [ 21 ] . 
Autophagy , as a process responding to stress conditions [ 22 ] , modulates the survival of M. tuberculosis inside macrophages [ 23,24 ] . 
At steady-state , about 5 % of M. tuberculosis-containing vacuoles colocalize with LC3 whereas 35 % of these vacuoles become positive upon autophagy stimulation by either nutritional starvation or drugs [ 22 ] . 
Importantly , autophagy releases the maturation arrest imposed by M. tuberculosis on its vacuole [ 23 ] . 
Intravacuolar survival of M. tuberculosis is also controlled by interferon-g ( INF-g ) . 
Thus , immunity-related GTPases ( IRGs ) activated upon INF-g stimulation promote anti-mycobacterial effect by inducing autophagy [ 24 ,25 ] . 
Remarkably , no study has yet addressed whether autop-hagy induction alters the trafﬁcking route of the SCV and the growth or survival of intravacuolar S. enterica . 
This aspect could be addressed in freshly isolated macrophages , which impair bacterial survival inside the SCV . 
Interestingly , S. enterica proliferates at a large extent in atg5 ( / ) embryonic ﬁbroblasts , deﬁcient in autophagosome maturation [ 19 ] . 
These differences correlate with the presence of a larger population of cytosolic bacteria , which were otherwise decorated with ubiquitinated proteins as in wild-type ﬁbroblasts . 
M. tuberculosis survival is affected by the exposure to ubiquitin-derived peptides [ 26 ] , but it is unknown whether a similar mechanism applies for S. enterica in ﬁbroblasts . 
Studies in macrophages have shown that cytosolic wild-type bacteria colocalize with ubiquitinated proteins , a process that may ultimately contribute to pathogen death [ 27 ] . 
The exact mechanism of this proposed ubiquitin-mediated killing has not been explored further . 
Furthermore , increased cytosolic positioning and growth of S. enterica in the autophagy-defective atg5 ( / ) ﬁbroblasts is intriguing considering that cytosol extracts of ﬁbroblasts restrict S. enterica growth [ 14 ] . 
Finally , it should be noted that pathogens as Shigella ﬂexneri and Listeria monocytogenes , which reside in the cytosol , efﬁciently evade autophagy [ 28 -- 30 ] . 
In summary , in the case of S. enterica infections these yet-confusing data do not clarify whether autophagy limits bacterial growth in the SCV and how the process is directed . 
Alarming but preserving the host cell
Besides autophagy , eukaryotic cells use other tools to combat bacterial infections , like the pattern-recognition receptors ( PRRs ) [ 31 ] or members of the mitogen-acti-vated protein ( MAP ) kinase family [ 32 ] . 
MAP kinase cascades are activated by mitogenic stimuli such as growth factors and hormones ( ERK 1/2 pathway ) ; or by a variety of cellular and environmental stresses ( JNK and p38 pathways ) . 
In macrophages , S. enterica and M. tuberculosis activate extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 ( ERK 1/2 ) , which impairs pathogen intravacuolar growth [ 33 ,34 ] . 
S. enterica also activates ERK 1/2 kinases in ﬁbroblasts ( Eisman et al. , unpublished ) . 
Consistent to these observations , mutants overgrowing in the SCV of ﬁbroblasts activate the ERK 1/2 cascade to a lesser extent . 
Intravacuolar wild-type bacteria may therefore intentionally stimulate these MAP kinases to attenuate the growth rate . 
It is noteworthy that neither the JNK nor the p38 cascades are activated in S. enterica-infected ﬁbroblasts ( Eisman et al. , unpublished ) , contrasting to the activation of these MAP kinases reported in epithelial cells infected with S. enterica or Campylobacter jejuni [ 35,36 ] . 
These differences reinforce once more the varied lifestyle of S. enterica in the SCV of distinct host cell types . 
In epithelial cells , S. enterica activates the pro-survival antiapoptotic kinase Akt-1 ( also known as protein kinase B , PKB ) by injecting SopB/SigD , a secreted effector with phosphoinositide-phosphatase activity . 
Although the exact mechanism of activation remains undeﬁned , Akt-1 is activated by S. enterica in a sustained manner several hours after bacterial entry [ 37 ] . 
This mode of activation is proposed to ensure the survival of the infected cell and to facilitate subsequent bacterial proliferation within the SCV . 
Such strategy has implications for the intestinal infection since S. enterica encounters epithelial cells undergoing a rapid turnover and having Akt-1 normally downregulated . 
S. enterica may also activate Akt-1 to limit inﬂammation and ensure intestinal colonization [ 38 ] . 
In ﬁbroblasts , nongrowing wild-type bacteria activate Akt-1 to a greater extent than mutants that overgrow inside the SCV ( Eisman et al. , unpublished ) . 
Apoptosis inhibition could facilitate long-lasting persistence of the bacteria in this particular SCV . 
Pharmacological inhibition of ERK 1 / 2-phosphorylation or Akt-1-phosphorylation results in overgrowth of wild-type S. enterica inside the SCV of ﬁbroblasts , which is consistent with active host defenses operating in this nonphagocytic cell type . 
Taken together , these observations further support the idea of S. enterica intentionally stimulating host defenses to attenuate growth in the SCV . 
Nutrition inside the SCV
The microenvironment of the SCV remains largely unknown . 
However , recent studies have shed light on nutrients and intermediate metabolism probably used by S. enterica inside the SCV . 
Microarray analysis performed with serovar Typhimurium in murine macro-phages indicated that magnesium , manganese , and iron could be limited in the SCV compared to a nutrient-rich medium like LB ( reviewed in [ 39 ] ) . 
Genes encoding transporters required for the uptake of these cations were upregulated in intracellular bacteria . 
Using a proteomic approach , Shi et al. conﬁrmed that some of these transporters , such as MgtB , SitA , SitB , and IroN , are abundant in bacteria recovered from macrophages [ 40 ] . 
Intriguingly , a recent microarray study suggests that iron may be not limiting in the SCV containing serovar Typhi [ 41 ] . 
This particular SCV may not have limiting manganese or phosphate , inferred by the non-induction of the sitABCD operon or genes induced by phosphate deprivation as phoN , pstA , or pstB [ 41 ] . 
Strikingly , serovar Typhi , but not Typhimurium , upregulates aceA in the SCV of macrophages . 
aceA encodes isocitrate lyase , an enzyme involved in the metabolism of fatty acids and acetate as carbon sources via the glyoxylate shunt [ 42 ] . 
These differences infer distinct lifestyles for these two serovars in the SCV of macrophages . 
Variables as the source of macrophages , infection conditions , methods of RNA isolation , and comparators used ( bacteria growing in LB or collected from infection growth medium ) , may also affect the relative extent of these differences . 
As an example , the microarray analysis performed with serovar Typhimurium used macrophages expressing a nonfunctional Slc11a1 ( also known as Nramp or Ity ) protein . 
Slc11a1 is a metal efﬂux pump proposed to remove essential cations from the SCV and therefore it is relevant in the control of bacterial intracellular growth [ 43 ] . 
In addition , these studies were performed with actively growing bacteria , which may differ in physiological terms from bacteria nonreplicating or struggling for survival in the SCV . 
Such comparison imposes a technical challenge because of the limitations of obtaining sufﬁcient material from nongrowing populations of intracellular bacteria . 
Regarding to in vivo data , recent proteomic studies ident-iﬁed serovar Typhimurium proteins in tissue extracts of infected mice and inferred usage of both aerobic and anaerobic electron acceptors [ 44 ] . 
Through a systematic analysis of bacterial mutants lacking key metabolic enzymes , Tchawa Yimga et al. showed that sugars could be used as main carbon source and that the tricarboxylic acid ( TCA ) cycle may operate as full cycle in the acute infection [ 45 ] . 
Fang et al. recently demonstrated that , for establishing a chronic infection , serovar Typhimurium may use fatty acids and acetate as carbon sources via the glyoxylate shunt [ 46 ] . 
AceA was shown to be essential in this infection model . 
Nonreplicating serovar Typhimur-ium also upregulates the glyoxylate shunt in cultured ﬁbroblasts . 
Likewise , M. tuberculosis has two isocitrate lyases ( Icl1 and Icl2 ) and both are involved in persistence and virulence [ 47 ] . 
Regarding other metabolic parameters , M. tuberculosis may undergo different respir-atory states depending on the infection stage [ 48 ] . 
During the chronic infection , nitrate is apparently preferred as terminal electron acceptor [ 10 ] . 
The nonreplicative phase of S. enterica in ﬁbroblasts is also accompanied by the upregulation of reductases using alternative electron acceptors other than oxygen ( Núñez - Hernández et al. , unpublished ) . 
Nonreplicating serovar Typhimurium inhabiting the SCV of ﬁbroblasts display other metabolic traits resembling those reported for ` dormant ' M. tuberculosis [ 10 ] ( Figure 2 ) . 
These include the decreased expression of genes encoding components of the H - ATPase + pump ( atp operon ) and ribosomal proteins as well as the upregulation of enzymes involved in anaerobic lipid catabolism and gluconeogenesis . 
Another important environmental cue unveiled in the SCV of ﬁbroblasts is hypoxia ( Núñez - Hernández et al. , unpublished ) [ 9 ] . 
This condition triggers entry of M. tuberculosis in the dormant state [ 4,5 ] . 
Cyo and Cyd terminal oxidases , which use oxygen exclusively as term-inal acceptor , are strongly downregulated in bacteria inhabiting the SCV of ﬁbroblasts . 
S. enterica also reduces in this niche energy-dependent processes as ﬂagella synthesis , consistent with the probable reduction of protonmotive force ( PMF ) and the aforementioned probable downregulation of the H - ATPase pump . 
This low - + energy state would also explain the strong upregulation of the ` phage-shock-response ' ( psp ) genes , which are induced upon PMF decrease [ 49 ] . 
Intriguingly , in ﬁbroblasts S. enterica also upregulates genes that are under control of the alternative sigma factor RpoN ( s or s ) , including some genes encoding N 54 enhancer-binding proteins ( EBPs ) promoting transcription by the RpoN -- RNA -- polymerase complex [ 50 ] . 
Target genes of the s -- EBP regulon are mostly involved in N responses allowing survival in hostile environments , including adaptation to niches with limiting nitrogen sources . 
psp genes form part of the sN -- EBP regulon 
Main physiological changes deciphered in nonreplicating Salmonella enterica enclosed in the SCV of fibroblasts . 
( a ) Components of S. enterica growing extracellularly that are strongly downregulated upon entry into fibroblasts ; ( b ) functions upregulated in bacteria remaining in a nonreplicative state inside the SCV . 
Some environmental cues assigned to this particular SCV , as hypoxia and ions limitation , are also indicated . 
In blue are marked changes also described for dormant Mycobacterium tuberculosis ( hypoxia ; usage of lipids acetate as carbon source via the glyoxylate shunt ; and upregulation of alternative reductases ) . 
Abbreviations : AceA , isocitrate lyase ; EBP , enhancer-binding proteins that mediate RpoN ( s ) - dependent transcription ; Psp , phage-shock N proteins ; SPI-1 -- SPI-2 TTSS , type-III secretion systems encoded in the pathogenicity islands SPI-1 and SPI-2 . 
and are also highly upregulated by S. enterica inhabiting the SCV of macrophages [ 39,41 ] and ﬁbroblasts . 
Expression of virulence genes by nongrowing S. enterica 
The specialized SPI-2 TTSS secretion system is a key virulence factor largely involved in intracellular replication and survival within macrophage and epithelial cells [ 51,52 ] . 
In ﬁbroblasts , expression of SPI-2 genes has been observed in nongrowing ( wild-type ) and overgrowing bacteria ( phoP mutant ) ( Núñez - Hernández et al. , unpublished ) . 
Unlike what has been reported in macrophages [ 53 ] , bacteria residing within the ﬁbroblast may not strictly require a functional PhoP -- PhoQ system to induce the SPI-2 TTSS system . 
Expression of SPI-2 genes also occurs in nongrowing Salmonella located inside the SCV of dendritic cells [ 54 ] , though it is unknown the relative contribution of the PhoP -- PhoQ in this particular cell type . 
The fact that in ﬁbroblasts the exacerbated growth of the phoP mutant relies on a functional SPI-2 TTSS [ 55 ] sustains a model based on the ﬁne-tuning of this virulence system as strategy to modulate the growth rate inside the SCV . 
Conclusions
S. enterica establishes different ways of life inside distinct eukaryotic cell types . 
Until recently , the biology of SCVs harboring nonreplicating bacteria was largely ignored . 
However , recent studies have shed new lights on this particular condition , ﬁnely regulated by the pathogen . 
The data collected in the ﬁbroblast model reveal a remarkable overlap with data previously reported for M. tuberculosis in the dormant , nonreplicative state . 
Environmental cues and responses shared in both conditions include hypoxia , downregulation of the ATP-synthase , usage of fatty acids as main carbon source , and the synthesis of proteins responding to stress ( Figure 2 ) . 
A yet missing element in the S. enterica model is a dedicated ` regulatory system ' promoting the adaptation to a nonreplicative state , as the DevSTR system in M. tuberculosis . 
If existing , the identiﬁcation of such novel regulatory network would be undoubtedly a major breakthrough to understanding how S. enterica controls intra-vacuolar growth . 
Finally , we should be more aware of the often-discordant data obtained in distinct in vitro cultured cells and in vivo mouse models , which probably reﬂects the inherent limitations of both systems . 
Future studies directly addressing the ultimate basis of the divergent and common trends found are clearly required . 
These analyses would increase our limited knowledge of the processes behind the disparate growth rates observed in different cell types and infection conditions . 
Update
Very recently , two studies have provided new insights on the different lifestyle of Salmonella inside the SCV of host distinct cell types as well as in mechanisms that could control the extent of bacterial replication within the SCV . 
In a microarray analysis performed in HeLa epithelial cells , Hautefort et al. [ 56 ] uncovered that , unlike what was previously observed in macrophages , Salmonella growing inside the SCV expresses the three type-III secretion systems present in this pathogen ( ﬂagella and those encoded in SPI-1 and SPI-2 ) . 
In the second study , Kuijl et al. [ 57 ] report using breast cancer epi-thelial cell that the targeting by SopB of PKB ( Akt-1 ) could prevent fusion of the SCV with lysosomes . 
Thus , pharmacological inhibition of Akt-1 as well as other kinases in a same functional network was shown to impair replication of Salmonella within the SCV . 
Akt-1 was previously shown to be targeted by Salmonella to promote antiapoptotic routes in the infected epithelial cell [ 37 ] . 
It is noteworthy that recent work by Drecktrah et al. in HeLa epithelial cells [ 58 ] revealed that the SCV , though being a replicative niche in this cell type , interacts with late compartments of the endocytic route such as lysosomes . 
Therefore , the exact extent at which Salmonella inhibits SCV -- lysosome fusion in epithelial cells and its impact on the control of bacterial growth remains to be clariﬁed . 
Acknowledgements
We thank Olivia Steele-Mortimer for the critical comments on sections of this manuscript . 
Work in the laboratory of FGP is supported by grants BIO2004-03455-C02-01 and GEN2006-27776-C2-1-E / PAT from the Ministry of Education and Science of Spain and LSHB-CT-2005-512061 ( NoE ` EuroPathogenomics ' ) from the European Union . 
CNH is recipient of a Fellowship from the ` Consejerıa de Educación de la Comunidad de Madrid ' . 
References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:
1 . 
Monack DM , Mueller A , Falkow S : Persistent bacterial infections : the interface of the pathogen and the host immune system . 
Nat Rev Microbiol 2004 , 2:747 -765 . 
2 . 
Israel DA , Peek RM Jr : The role of persistence in Helicobacter pylori pathogenesis . 
Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2006 , 22:3 -7 . 
5 . 
Sousa EH , Tuckerman JR , Gonzalez G , Gilles-Gonzalez MA : DosT and DevS are oxygen-switched kinases in Mycobacterium tuberculosis . 
Protein Sci 2007 , 16:1708 -1719 . 
8 . 
Lawley TD , Chan K , Thompson LJ , Kim CC , Govoni GR , Monack DM : Genome-wide screen for Salmonella genes required for long-term systemic infection of the mouse . 
PLoS Pathog 2006 , 2 : e11 . 
Using pools of transposon mutants , ampliﬁcation of insertion-ﬂanking regions , microarray technology , and a chronic infection model ( 129X1 / SvJ , Nramp + / + mice ) , this study reveals the identity of S. enterica functions required for a long-lasting infection ( up to 28 days ) by negative selection . 
It is noteworthy that SPI-1 functions ( previously implicated in early infection events ) were among the most prevalent functions selected in the study . 
9 . 
Cano DA , Pucciarelli MG , Martinez-Moya M , Casadesus J , Garcia-del Portillo F : Selection of small-colony variants of Salmonella 
10 . 
Murphy DJ , Brown JR : Identiﬁcation of gene targets against dormant phase Mycobacterium tuberculosis infections . 
BMC 
Infect Dis 2007 , 7:84 . 
Updated overview of M. tuberculosis functions related to the dormancy state , including a vision of those with a higher potential of being targeted with success for therapy usage . 
11 . 
Knodler LA , Steele-Mortimer O : Taking possession : biogenesis of the Salmonella-containing vacuole . 
Trafﬁc 2003 , 4:587 -599 . 
12 . 
Tierrez A , Garcia-del Portillo F : New concepts in Salmonella virulence : the importance of reducing the intracellular growth rate in the host . 
Cell Microbiol 2005 , 7:901 -909 . 
13. Brumell JH, Perrin AJ, Goosney DL, Finlay BB: Microbial pathogenesis: new niches for Salmonella. Curr Biol 2002, 12:R15-R17.
14 . 
Brown SP , Cornell SJ , Sheppard M , Grant AJ , Maskell DJ , Grenfell BT , Mastroeni P : Intracellular demography and the dynamics of Salmonella enterica infections . 
PLoS Biol 2006 , 4 : e349 . 
15 . 
Beuzon CR , Salcedo SP , Holden DW : Growth and killing of a Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium sifA mutant strain in the cytosol of different host cell lines . 
Microbiology 2002 , 148:2705 -2715 . 
16 . 
Brumell JH , Tang P , Zaharik ML , Finlay BB : Disruption of the Salmonella-containing vacuole leads to increased replication of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium in the cytosol of epithelial cells . 
Infect Immun 2002 , 70:3264 -3270 . 
17 . 
Radtke AL , Delbridge LM , Balachandran S , Barber GN , O'Riordan MX : TBK1 protects vacuolar integrity during intracellular bacterial infection . 
PLoS Pathog 2007 , 3 : e29 . 
This study implicates a host defense factor , the TANK-binding kinase 1 ( TBK-1 ) , in the control of Salmonella enterica intracellular growth by maintaining the integrity of the SCV membrane . 
Such control prevents the release of bacteria to the cytosol , a compartment in which bacteria proliferate extensively . 
Similar observations are presented in distinct cell types and with other pathogens as Streptococcus pyogenes and patho-genic Escherichia coli . 
18 . 
Birmingham CL , Brumell JH : Autophagy recognizes intracellular Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium in damaged vacuoles . 
Autophagy 2006 , 2:156 -158 . 
19 . 
Birmingham CL , Smith AC , Bakowski MA , Yoshimori T , Brumell JH : Autophagy controls Salmonella infection in response to damage to the Salmonella-containing vacuole . 
J Biol Chem 2006 , 281:11374 -11383 . 
This study shows that damaged SCVs are recognized by the autophagic system of the infected cell . 
20 . 
Roy D , Liston DR , Idone VJ , Di A , Nelson DJ , Pujol C , Bliska JB , Chakrabarti S , Andrews NW : A process for controlling intracellular bacterial infections induced by membrane injury . 
Science 2004 , 304:1515 -1518 . 
This study reveals the recognition of ` altered ' SCV by defense systems of the infected cell . 
In this case , perforation of the SCV was proposed to be recognized by synaptogamin VII , promoting fusion of the SCV with lysosomes in a Ca - dependent manner . 
2 + 
21 . 
Hernandez LD , Pypaert M , Flavell RA , Galan JE : A Salmonella protein causes macrophage cell death by inducing autophagy . 
J Cell Biol 2003 , 163:1123 -1131 . 
22 . 
Klionsky DJ : Autophagy : from phenomenology to molecular understanding in less than a decade . 
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007 , 
8:931 -937 . 
Excellent review of autophagy , which summarizes advances in the ﬁeld from a scientiﬁc-historical perspective . 
23 . 
Gutierrez MG , Master SS , Singh SB , Taylor GA , Colombo MI , Deretic V : Autophagy is a defense mechanism inhibiting BCG and Mycobacterium tuberculosis survival in infected macrophages . 
Cell 2004 , 119:753 -766 . 
24 . 
Levine B , Deretic V : Unveiling the roles of autophagy in innate and adaptive immunity . 
Nat Rev Immunol 2007 , 7:767 -777 . 
An excellent review of autophagy highlighting its role as a defense mechanism against infections . 
25 . 
Singh SB , Davis AS , Taylor GA , Deretic V : Human IRGM induces autophagy to eliminate intracellular mycobacteria . 
Science 2006 , 313:1438 -1441 . 
26 . 
Alonso S , Pethe K , Russell DG , Purdy GE : Lysosomal killing of Mycobacterium mediated by ubiquitin-derived peptides is enhanced by autophagy . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007 , 104:6031 -6036 . 
27 . 
Perrin AJ , Jiang X , Birmingham CL , So NS , Brumell JH : Recognition of bacteria in the cytosol of mammalian cells by the ubiquitin system . 
Curr Biol 2004 , 14:806 -811 . 
28 . 
Birmingham CL , Canadien V , Gouin E , Troy EB , Yoshimori T , Cossart P , Higgins DE , Brumell JH : Listeria monocytogenes evades killing by autophagy during colonization of host cells . 
Autophagy 2007 , 3:442 -451 . 
29 . 
Ogawa M , Yoshimori T , Suzuki T , Sagara H , Mizushima N , Sasakawa C : Escape of intracellular Shigella from autophagy . 
Science 2005 , 307:727 -731 . 
30 . 
Ogawa M , Sasakawa C : Bacterial evasion of the autophagic 
31 . 
Medzhitov R : Recognition of microorganisms and activation of the immune response . 
Nature 2007 , 449:819 -826 . 
32 . 
Avruch J : MAP kinase pathways : the ﬁrst twenty years . 
Biochim Biophys Acta 2007 , 1773:1150 -1160 . 
33 . 
Rosenberger CM , Finlay BB : Macrophages inhibit Salmonella typhimurium replication through MEK/ERK kinase and phagocyte NADPH oxidase activities . 
J Biol Chem 2002 , 277:18753 -18762 . 
This study shows that an MAP kinase cascade controls Salmonella enterica replication in the SCV of macrophages . 
34 . 
Blumenthal A , Ehlers S , Ernst M , Flad HD , Reiling N : Control of mycobacterial replication in human macrophages : roles of extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways . 
Infect Immun 2002 , 70:4961 -4967 . 
35 . 
Hobbie S , Chen LM , Davis RJ , Galan JE : Involvement of mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways in the nuclear responses and cytokine production induced by Salmonella typhimurium in cultured intestinal epithelial cells . 
J Immunol 1997 , 159:5550 -5559 . 
36 . 
Chen ML , Ge Z , Fox JG , Schauer DB : Disruption of tight junctions and induction of proinﬂammatory cytokine responses in colonic epithelial cells by Campylobacter jejuni . 
Infect Immun 2006 , 74:6581 -6589 . 
37 . 
Knodler LA , Finlay BB , Steele-Mortimer O : The Salmonella effector protein SopB protects epithelial cells from apoptosis by sustained activation of Akt . 
J Biol Chem 2005 , 280:9058 -9064 . 
This study shows a sustained stimulation of antiapoptotic routes in Salmonella-infected epithelial cells . 
38 . 
Huang FC , Li Q , Cherayil BJ : A phosphatidyl-inositol-3-kinase-dependent anti-inﬂammatory pathway activated by Salmonella in epithelial cells . 
FEMS Microbiol Lett 2005 , 243:265 -270 . 
39 . 
Thompson A , Rowley G , Alston M , Danino V , Hinton JC : Salmonella transcriptomics : relating regulons , stimulons and regulatory networks to the process of infection . 
Curr Opin Microbiol 2006 , 9:109 -116 . 
Review describing signiﬁcance of transcriptome data obtained from Salmonella mutants and in distinct environmental conditions , including the SCV of macrophages . 
40 . 
Shi L , Adkins JN , Coleman JR , Schepmoes AA , Dohnkova A , Mottaz HM , Norbeck AD , Purvine SO , Manes NP , Smallwood HS et al. : Proteomic analysis of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium isolated from RAW 264.7 macrophages : identiﬁcation of a novel protein that contributes to the replication of serovar Typhimurium inside macrophages . 
J Biol Chem 2006 , 281:29131 -29140 . 
First proteomic study in intracellular Salmonella enterica recovered from infected macrophages . 
41 . 
Faucher SP , Porwollik S , Dozois CM , McClelland M , Daigle F : Transcriptome of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi within 
42 . 
Munoz-Elias EJ , McKinney JD : Carbon metabolism of intracellular bacteria . 
Cell Microbiol 2006 , 8:10 -22 . 
Excellent review that describes the current knowledge on the metabolism of bacteria inhabiting the intracellular niche of eukaryotic cells or animal locations such as the intestine . 
It highlights the profound differences found with metabolism known for laboratory-grown bacteria . 
43 . 
Fortier A , Min-Oo G , Forbes J , Lam-Yuk-Tseung S , Gros P : Single gene effects in mouse models of host : pathogen interactions . 
J Leukoc Biol 2005 , 77:868 -877 . 
44 . 
Becker D , Selbach M , Rollenhagen C , Ballmaier M , Meyer TF , Mann M , Bumann D : Robust Salmonella metabolism limits possibilities for new antimicrobials . 
Nature 2006 , 440:303 -307 . 
Systematic identiﬁcation by proteomics of Salmonella enterica proteins synthesized during acute infection of susceptible mice , making an ana-lysis of the preferred metabolic routes used in vivo . 
45 . 
Tchawa Yimga M , Leatham MP , Allen JH , Laux DC , Conway T , Cohen PS : Role of gluconeogenesis and the tricarboxylic acid cycle in the virulence of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium in BALB/c mice . 
Infect Immun 2006 , 74:1130 -1140 . 
46 . 
Fang FC , Libby SJ , Castor ME , Fung AM : Isocitrate lyase ( AceA ) is required for Salmonella persistence but not for acute lethal infection in mice . 
Infect Immun 2005 , 73:2547 -2549 . 
This study shows that isocitrate lyase ( AceA ) is an important factor in the Salmonella chronic infection . 
47 . 
Munoz-Elias EJ , McKinney JD : Mycobacterium tuberculosis isocitrate lyases 1 and 2 are jointly required for in vivo growth and virulence . 
Nat Med 2005 , 11:638 -644 . 
48 . 
Shi L , Sohaskey CD , Kana BD , Dawes S , North RJ , Mizrahi V , Gennaro ML : Changes in energy metabolism of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in mouse lung and under in vitro conditions affecting aerobic respiration . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005 , 102:15629 -15634 . 
49 . 
Darwin AJ : The phage-shock-protein response . 
Mol Microbiol 2005 , 57:621 -628 . 
50 . 
Studholme DJ : Enhancer-dependent transcription in Salmonella enterica Typhimurium : new members of the sigmaN regulon inferred from protein sequence homology and predicted promoter sites . 
J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol 2002 , 4:367 -374 . 
51 . 
Abrahams GL , Hensel M : Manipulating cellular transport and immune responses : dynamic interactions between intracellular Salmonella enterica and its host cells . 
Cell Microbiol 2006 , 8:728 -737 . 
52 . 
Waterman SR , Holden DW : Functions and effectors of the Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 type III secretion system . 
Cell Microbiol 2003 , 5:501 -511 . 
53 . 
Bijlsma JJ , Groisman EA : The PhoP/PhoQ system controls the intramacrophage type three secretion system of Salmonella enterica . 
Mol Microbiol 2005 , 57:85 -96 . 
55 . 
Cano DA , Martinez-Moya M , Pucciarelli MG , Groisman EA , Casadesus J , Garcia-Del Portillo F : Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium response involved in attenuation of pathogen intracellular proliferation . 
Infect Immun 2001 , 69:6463 -6474 . 
56 . 
Hautefort I , Thompson A , Eriksson-Ygberg S , Parker ML , Lucchini S , Danino V , Bongaerts RJ , Ahmad N , Rhen M , Hinton JC : During infection of epithelial cells Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium undergoes a time-dependent transcriptional adaptation that results in simultaneous expression of three type 3 secretion systems . 
Cell Microbiol 2008 , 10:958 -984 . 
By analysis of genome expression of Salmonella upon infection of Hela epithelial cells , authors show common and unique features compared to intracellular bacteria in the SCV of macrophages . 
A striking ﬁnding was the simultaneous expression of three type-III secretion systems in intracellular bacteria ( ﬂagella and those encoded by SPI-1 and SPI-2 ) . 
57 . 
Kuijl C , Savage ND , Marsman M , Tuin AW , Janssen L , Egan DA , Ketema M , van den Nieuwendijk R , van den Eeden SJ , Geluk A et al. : Intracellular bacterial growth is controlled by a kinase network around PKB/AKT1 . 
Nature 2007 , 450:725 -730 . 
This study analyses the effect on Salmonella replication of distinct drugs in epithelial cells that target kinases and proposes that AKT-1 ( PKB ) plays a pivotal role in the control of intracellular growth by preventing fusion of the SCV with lysosomes . 
58 . 
Drecktrah D , Knodler LA , Howe D , Steele-Mortimer O : Salmonella trafﬁcking is deﬁned by continuous dynamic interactions with the endolysosomal system . 
Trafﬁc 2007 , 8:212 -225 . 
This work demonstrates in HeLa epithelial cells that the SCV , modeled as replicative niche in this cell type , is a highly dynamic compartment that interacts with late compartments of the endocytic route such as lysosomes , even at early infection times .