Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect 
Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology, Part D
journal homepage : www . 
elsevi er.com/locate/cbpd 
Shift in chicken intestinal gene association networks after infection with Salmonella 
Dirkjan Schokker a , , Dirk-Jan de Koning b , Johanna M.J. Rebel c , Mari A. Smits a 
a Animal Breeding and Genomics Centre , Wageningen UR Livestock Research , Lelystad , P.O. Box 65 , 8200 AB , The Netherlands b Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics , Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences , Box 7023 , 750 07 Uppsala , Sweden c Central Veterinary Institute , Wageningen UR , Lelystad , P.O. Box 65 , 8200 AB , The Netherlands 
a r t i c l e 
a b s t r a c t 
i n f o 
Article history : Received 1 July 2011 
A primary infection of Salmonella enteritidis causes a spatial-temporal dependent change in the gene expression patterns in the intestine of chickens ( Gallus gallus ) . 
This is the result of a dynamic intestinal response to adapt to the altered environment and to optimize its ` health ' and functionality under the new circumstances . 
By inferring gene association networks ( GANs ) , the complexities of and changes in biological networks can be uncovered . 
Within such GANs highly interacting ( hub ) genes can be identiﬁed , which are supposed to be high-level regulators connected to multiple processes . 
By exploring the intestinal expression of genes differing between control and Salmonella infected chicken in a time-dependent manner differences in GANs were found . 
In control chickens more developmental processes were observed , whereas in infected chickens relatively more processes were associated to ` defense/pathogen response ' . 
Moreover the conserved protein domains of the identiﬁed hub genes in controls were nuclear-associated , whereas hub genes in infected chickens were involved in ` cellular communication ' . 
The shift in topology and functionality of the intestinal GANs in control and Salmonella infected animals and the identiﬁcation of GAN-speciﬁc hubs is a ﬁrst step to understand the complexity of biological networks and processes regulating intestinal health and functionality under normal and disturbed conditions . 
© 2011 Elsevier Inc. . 
All rights reserved . 
Received in revised form 19 July 2011 Accepted 19 July 2011 Available online 16 August 2011 
Keywords : Gene expression 
Hubs Jejunum Salmonella enteritidis Chicken Gene Associated Network 
1. Introduction
Salmonella enterica serovar enteritidis ( van Zijderveld et al. , 1992 ) is a pathogen , which causes an infection especially in young chickens . 
After ingestion , Salmonella colonizes the intestine and invades the intestinal mucosa ( Suzuki , 1994 ) which subsequently induces an array of innate and adaptive immune responses . 
Infection with Salmonella enteritidis rarely causes mortality in chickens that are more than 1 month old ( Suzuki , 1994 ) . 
However , in young chickens this infection leads to diarrhea and an inﬂux of heterophils ( equivalent of mammalian neutrophils ) together with intestinal inﬂammation and damaged epithelial cells ( Barrow et al. , 1987 ) . 
The mobilized heterophils are known to play an important role in restricting Salmonella to the gut and protection against the development of systemic disease ( Kogut et al. , 1994 ) . 
By the application of gene expression studies , many genes are already known to be involved in the chicken response after challenge with Salmonella . 
A number of these studies have contributed to the current understanding of the effect of Salmonella on the host response ( Withanage et al. , 2005 ; Kaiser et al. , 2006 ; van Hemert et al. , 2006b , 
Abbreviations : GAN , Gene Association Network ; ANOVA , Analysis of Variance ; DAVID , Database for Annotation , Visualization and Integrated Discovery ; CDD , Conserved Domain Database . 
Corresponding author at : Department of Livestock Research , Vijfde Polder 1 , 6708 WC Wageningen , Wageningen , Gelderland , The Netherlands . 
E-mail address : d.schokker@gmail.com ( D. Schokker ) . 
2007 ; Zhou and Lamont , 2007 ) . 
These genome-wide functional studies indicated that a number of genes , signaling pathways and effector mechanisms , associated with different immunological processes and cells , including T cells , are activated by the infection process in order to combat the invading pathogen and restore tissue homeostasis . 
In addition , Salmonella infections in young chicks also affect normal development and metabolic functioning of the intestine by changing the expression of a huge variety of genes and processes ( Chappell et al. , 2009 ) . 
It is likely that all these immunological and non-immunological pathways and processes are connected in time to each other in global gene association networks and that they are orchestrated by a limited number of high-level ` regulators ' , the so called hub genes . 
Thus genes that are regulated at time point X , inﬂuence gene induction at time point X +1 . 
However , such time-dependent , global gene association networks have not been generated so far for complex tissues and high-level tissue ` regulators ' have not been identiﬁed , although they have the potential to orchestrate an array of genes or processes . 
In a dynamic and heterogeneous multi-cellular tissue , such as a developing intestine , this type of regulators are expected to include global transcription factors and molecules involved in intra - and inter-cellular signaling and communication . 
Therefore , identiﬁcation of candidate high-level regulators might be of importance for the development of strategies to modulate intestinal homeostasis . 
A major drawback of many gene expression studies is that they only provide ` snapshot views ' of the gene association networks controlling the ( transcriptional ) response of biological systems . 
Also for Salmonell infected chicken , time-dependent regulation of gene expression has poorly been investigated and has been a major limitation in the modeling of gene association networks . 
Such networks are critical to begin to understand the behavior of a developing chicken intestine under normal and severely disturbed conditions . 
Therefore the objective of this study was to make an effort to generate gene association networks describing the transcriptional response of chicken intestinal tissue in time under two highly contrasting conditions and to identify and characterize candidate high-level regulators . 
1744-117X / $ -- see front matter © 2011 Elsevier Inc. . 
All rights reserved . 
doi :10.1016 / j.cbd .2011.07.004 
2. Material and methods
The study was approved by the ` Dier Experimenten Commissie ' ( DEC ) , in accordance with the Dutch regulations on animal experiments . 
The registration number is 2006044 . 
b and the experimental number 2006048 . 
2.1. Animal experiment
Broiler male chickens ( Gallus gallus ) were orally inoculated at day of hatch with 0.2 ml phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) containing 1 × 105 Salmonella enteritidis nalidixic acid resistant strain of Salmonella enterica serotype enteritidis PT4 isolated from chicken ( van Zijderveld et al. , 1992 ) or with PBS ( control group ) . 
At seven consecutive time-points 8 hours post infection ; 1 ; 2 ; 4 ; 8 ; 12 ; and 21 days post infection , jejunal whole tissue samples , liver and ceaca were taken of 5 chickens of the Salmonella infected group and 5 chickens of the control group , all samples for RNA analyses were immediately snap frozen in liquid nitrogen . 
Bacteriological colonization assays were performed for liver and caecum , which showed a peak of approximately 8 × 108 colony forming units ( CFUs ) at 4 days post infection ( dpi ) for caecum and at 2 dpi approximately 6,000 CFUs for liver . 
No CFUs were found at any time point in the control group ( data not shown , see Fig. 1 in Schokker et al. , 2010 ) . 
RNA was isolated from whole intestinal tissue samples as described before . 
Intestine from individual chicken intestine was homogenized in TRIzol ( Invitrogen , Breda , The Netherlands ) and RNA was isolated . 
This RNA was puriﬁed using the Macherey-Nagel NucleoSpin ® RNA II kit ( April 2007/Rev . 
07 ) . 
2.2. Microarray data
Gene expression data ( 42,034 ) Ia 
Interaction Time-Group (4,083) Ib
The intestinal RNA used for microarray analyses consisted of seven time-points : 8 hours post infection ; 1 ; 2 ; 4 ; 8 ; 12 ; and 21 days post infection of Salmonella and control chickens . 
At each time-point 10 
Subset p<10-5 (759)
II
Control ( 519 ) 
Infected ( 595 ) 
Func . 
Enrichment ( 200 ) 
Func . 
Enrichment ( 200 ) 
III 
III 
VI 
VI 
Visualization ( 595 ) IV 
Visualization ( 519 ) IV 
VII 
VII 
Network Statistics V 
Network Statistics V 
Top 20 Hubs 
Top 20 Hubs 
VIII 
VIII 
Ia N-way ANOVA p < 0.01 Ib p-value threshold III Cytoscape CentiScaPe plug-in + II GeneNet ( R-package ) IV NetworkAnalyzer 
VII Hubba plug-in 
V ` Random ' plug-in 
VIII NCBI CDD 
VI DAVID FAC 
Fig. 1 . 
Pipeline of network generation and analyses . 
Different ﬁltering steps and analyses are depicted . 
Eight different consecutive analyses were performed : Ia ) N-way ANOVA on all probes and Ib ) a more stringent p-value cut-off to limit the number of probes considered ; II ) the speciﬁc probe subset was used in ` GeneNet ' for control and Salmonella infected chickens separately ; III ) resulting GANs were visualized with Cytoscape ; IV ) various network statistics were calculated by different methods ; V ) random scale-free networks were generated ; VI ) for both GANs residing genes were functionally annotated and clustered ; VII ) for both networks the top 20 ranking hubs were calculated ; and VIII ) the protein sequences of the identiﬁed hubs were investigated for thepresence ofknown proteindomains . 
Thenumber of nodes/genes whichis present at that stage isindicated between brackets . 
Thevarious R tools andCytoscape plug-ins which were used at the different steps are indicated by roman numbers . 
Abbreviations : Func. , Functional ; DAVID FAC , Database for Annotation , Visualization and Integrated Discovery : Functional Annotation Clustering ; NCBI CDD , National Center for Biotechnology Information : Conserved protein Domain Database 
chickens were sacriﬁced , 5 control and 5 Salmonella infected chickens , resulting in a total of 70 samples that were independently used for microarray analyses . 
RNA was labeled following Agilent protocols and was individually , in a single dye design hybridized to Agilent 4 × 44 K chicken arrays ( AMADID 015068 ) . 
The Agilent protocols ( GE1-v5_95_Feb07 ) were strictly followed for all procedures , including hybridization , washing , staining and scanning ( Schokker et al. , 2009 , 2010 ) . 
All hybridizations were performed in a controlled environment and one batch of dye was used to decrease the variation between arrays . 
Moreover the data for both control and Salmonella infected is MIAME compliant and the raw data is available at ArrayExpress , accession number E-MEXP-2042 . 
All 70 slides were loaded and quantile normalized simultaneously . 
The normalized data is depicted in tabdelimited Supplementary File ` Norm_Exp_Combined .7 z ' . 
2.3. N-way ANOVA
Within GeneSpring GX ( v. 10.0.2 build 85765 ) , an N-Way ANalysis Of VAriance ( ANOVA ) was performed to determine the concurrent effect of N parameters . 
In this particular case two parameters and their interaction term were determined , thus we performed a 2-way ANOVA . 
This assesses the individual inﬂuence of each parameter as well as their net interactive effect , both calculated by type-III sum of squares ( SS ) ( Speed et al. , 1978 ; Shaw and Mitchellolds , 1993 ) . 
The type-III SS is deﬁned as follows : Let T and G be the factors , containing different levels . 
The complete model for these factors is yijk = μ + ti + gj + cij + eijk , where yijk is the k-th observation in ij-th treatment group , μ the grand mean , ti ( gj ) the additive combination and cij and eijk the error term , which accounts for the variation in y that can not be explained by the other terms on the right hand side of the equation . 
The difference in residual sum of squares ( RSS ) of the models , is the SS corresponding to factor T. Besides factor T , this difference in RSS between the full model and the model excluding that factor , can be performed for factor G and C ( interaction term ) . 
In our analysis , a 2-way ANOVA was performed between ` time ' ( 0.33 , 1 , 2 , 4 , 8 , 12 and 21 days post infection ( dpi ) ) , ` group ' ( control or infected ) and ` interaction time-group ' . 
Within GeneSpring the option ` pairs of conditions ' was used , furthermore we selected the following pairings ; ` control 0.33 dpi ' vs. ` infected 0.33 dpi ' , ` control 1 dpi ' vs. ` infected 1 dpi ' , etcetera . 
Thus probes which are signiﬁcant under a certain threshold differ between control and infected on a certain time-point . 
All probes were used as input and an asymptotic p-value computation with a Benjamini -- Hochberg multiple testing correction was performed . 
Results are summarized and depicted in a Venn-diagram ( Fig. 2 ) . 
Probes which were signiﬁcant under a p-value of 10 − 5 ( 759 probes ) in the time-group interaction were selected as input for the network . 
Such a stringent cut-off , pb10 − 5 , was used to decrease the number of probes which were used as input for the GeneNet software , because Opgen-Rhein and colleagues showed that the linearity assumption of the VAR model is satisﬁed when using approximately 800 nodes as input ( Opgen-Rhein and Strimmer , 2007b ) . 
Fig. 2 . 
Venn diagram of 2-way ANOVA categories . 
Probes which are under the a p-value threshold of 0.01 are divided over three categories ; ` group ' ( red ) , ` time ' ( blue ) and ` interaction time-group ' ( green ) . 
yijk = μ + ti + gj + cij + eijk and yijk = μ + gj + cij + eijk 
2.4. Gene networks
Gene networks were derived using the R-package GeneNet ( v. 1.2.3 ) , which is publicly available on the Comprehensive R Archive network ( CRAN ) website ( http://cran.r-project.org/ ) as well as on Strimmer 's laboratory website ( http://strimmerlab.org/software/genenet/ ) . 
This package was used to derive high-dimensional dependency networks from genomic data ( Schafer and Strimmer , 2005a , b ; Opgen-Rhein and Strimmer , 2007a , b ) . 
The consecutive algorithm steps are : 1 ) determine correlation matrix by use of shrinkage estimator ( and deﬁne whether the data is longitudinal ) ; 2 ) calculate partial variances and correlations ; 3 ) infer partial correlation graph ; 4 ) conduct multiple testing ( FDR ) ; and 
5 ) construct directed network . 
In the current version of GeneNet , putative directions to edges in the network are also assigned . 
The data was loaded and set as longitudinal , with 5 repeats for every time point . 
Furthermore , in the control data the correlation shrinkage intensity , lambda , was estimated at 0.4478 and the variance shrinkage intensity , lambda_var , at 0.4103 . 
In the Salmonella infected situation the lambda was estimated at 0.0885 and the lambda_var at 0.0514 . 
All these analyses were performed in the R-environment , version 2.9.0 . 
The resulting networks were visualized by Cytoscape ( v. 2.6.2 ) ( Shannon et al. , 2003 ) , the top 1000 edges for both situations were depicted , resulting in 519 nodes in control and 595 nodes in infected chickens . 
Note that because of the poor annotation of the chicken genome , multiple probes representing the same gene were not combined . 
Thus it is possible that in subsequent analysis a gene can be represent more than once . 
2.5. Further analyses using Cytoscape plug-ins
2.5.1. CentiScaPe 1.1
This tool was used to calculate different network centrality parameters , which were used to compare the data-driven networks . 
CentiScape ( Scardoni et al. , 2009 ) also provides a Boolean logic based tool , as well as characterization of nodes whose topological relevance depends on more than one centrality . 
Furthermore this plug-in is completely integrated into Cytoscape and can be freely downloaded at http://chianti.ucsd.edu/cyto_web/plugins/index.php . 
Before analyzing the networks separately , the isolated nodes in the control network were removed . 
In the infected network no isolated nodes were observed . 
2.5.2. Random network
Scale-free networks are most commonly observed in biology ( Barabasi and Oltvai , 2004 ; Albert , 2005 ) , and these networks are compared to our chicken gene expression networks . 
The aim is to investigate whether ` real ' data has similar aspects and components as observed in scale-free random networks . 
The following simulation settings were used : the number of nodes was set to 519 for control or 595 for infected , minimum edges per node were 2 and initial number of nodes was 3 . 
This plug-in can be downloaded at http://groups.google.com/ group/cytoscape-announce/browse _ thread/thread/31b7d20b062f6f3b ? 
pli = 1 and has three main components , but we only used ` generating random networks according to three different models ' . 
Because our focu 
2.5.3. Hub calculations
We used the package HUBBA within the Cytoscape environment , where for each node different topology-based scoring methods were calculated . 
The hubs identiﬁed in the networks are based on their ` bottleneck ' score , which is used for exploring the importance of nodes in interaction networks by different topology based approaches . 
In this study probes with the top 20 highest ` bottleneck ' scores are deﬁned as hubs and were ranked by this score from high score ( rank 1 ) to low score ( rank 20 ) . 
The Bottleneck Score is calculated as described by Przulj et al. ( 2004 ) , where for each node v in the interaction network , a tree of shortest paths is constructed originating from node v . 
The Hub Objects Analyzer ( HUBBA ) package ( Lin et al. , 2008 ) was used for exploring important nodes in an interactome network . 
This method is based on graph theory and publicly available at http://hub.iis.sinica.edu.tw/Hubba . 
2.6. Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST)
A mapping and annotation step was performed for the hub genes , because information for these probes was lacking . 
This was based on the location of the probe sequence in the chicken genome ( NCBI Build 2.1 ) after performing BLAST ( Gish and States , 1993 ; Johnson et al. , 2008 ; Morgulis et al. , 2008 ) . 
The following steps were performed : 1 ) all 40 sequences ( 38 unique ) from the hub genes were modiﬁed to a FASTA-format , 2 ) blastn from NCBI BLAST was used ( Gish and States , 1993 ; Johnson et al. , 2008 ; Morgulis et al. , 2008 ) , 3 ) the unique sequences were queried with the following options in the database : refseq_genomic , organism : G. gallus ( taxid : 9031 ) and optimize for highly similar sequences ( megablast ) , 4 ) the results were parsed using BioPerl ( Stajich et al. , 2002 ) . 
The resulting genome locations were visualized in NCBI 's G. gallus ( chicken ) genome Map Viewer ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/mapview/map_search.cgi ? 
taxid = 9031 ) . 
This is summarized in Supplementary Table S1 . 
2.7. Functional annotation clustering
The Database for Annotation , Visualization and Integrated Discovery ( DAVID ) ( Dennis et al. , 2003 ) was used for functional annotation clustering . 
Within DAVID ( 2008 ) different data sources are combined and analyzed by heuristic fuzzy multiple-linkage partitioning ( Huang et al. , 2007 ) . 
For the genes present in each network a separate functional annotation clustering was performed . 
The input was a list of chicken genes symbols which was converted to its homologous human symbol . 
Because human has a better annotation and more databases are available , all the clusters were analyzed by choosing a human background . 
For every functional grouping an enrichment score was calculated , by the following formula : qfififififififififififififififififififififififi ES = − Logð n p1 p2 : : : : : : : pnÞ : 
Where ES is the enrichment score , and p1 , p2 and pn are the individual p-values of the associated database term . 
Stringency was set to high , which implies that similarity term overlap was set to 3 and the corresponding threshold to 0.85 . 
Furthermore the initial group membership , as well as the ﬁnal group membership was set to 3 , and the multiple linkage threshold was set to 0.50 . 
The default data sources and their corresponding databases were used . 
2.8. Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
To characterize the hub genes of both control and infected chickens , we investigated conserved domains in their protein 
3. Results
3.1. Gene selection and inferred networks
By performing the 2-way ANOVA method we identiﬁed which probes were signiﬁcant when testing for difference in ` group ' ( control versus infected ) , ` time ' ( 8 hpi -- 21 dpi ) or the ` interaction time-group ' . 
When a probe is signiﬁcantly different when testing for control versus Salmonella infected , the probe will be present in ` group ' . 
Signiﬁcant for ` time ' means that a probe differs in one or more time-points compared to the whole time-series . 
If the net interaction effect of ` time ' and ` group ' is signiﬁcant , this means that these probes can have different effects ( Figure S1 ) . 
Each factor ( ` group ' and ` time ' ) is assessed individually , as well as the net interactive effect of the two factors ( ` interaction time-group ' ) . 
All probes were evaluated for ` group ' , ` time ' and ` interaction time-group ' , resulting in 16,441 probes for ` group ' , 15,898 probes for ` time ' , and 4,083 probes for ` interaction time-group ' , with all probes being signiﬁcant under a corrected p-value of 0.01 ( Fig. 2 ) . 
In total 4,083 probes obtained of the input of Salmonella and control data of all time points reside in the ` interaction time-group ' and this genes have the potential to regulate each other because these genes showed interaction with time and infection status and are therefore the most promising genes for building association networks . 
From this we generated a sub-selection of 759 probes ( pb10 − 5 ) , because we decided to focus only on genes which display a contrast between control and Salmonella infected chickens in time with a high signiﬁcance . 
These 759 probes were used to generate the networks for both control and Salmonella infected chicken and used as input for GeneNet ( Schafer and Strimmer , 2005a , b ; Opgen-Rhein and Strimmer , 2007a , b ) . 
Only the top 1000 most signiﬁcant edges , with a corresponding FDRb0 .1 ( Figure S2 ) were visualized with Cytoscape ( Shannon et al. , 2003 ) . 
In the control situation 519 nodes were present in the GAN out of the 759 probes used as input , whereas 595 nodes were present in the GAN of the Salmonella infected situation . 
Because we only visualize the top 1000 edges , not all nodes are represented in the networks , the remaining 240 ( control GAN ) or 164 ( infected GAN ) nodes are not connected to the 519 ( control GAN ) or 595 ( infected GAN ) nodes with this threshold . 
A total of 406 nodes were present in both visualized networks . 
Several nodes were only observed in one GAN , meaning that such probes interact highly depending on the context of the circumstances , presence or absence of Salmonella . 
To conﬁrm whether these networks represent and resemble biological networks , the inferred GANs were compared with ` random ' scale-free networks . 
By inferring ` random ' networks , we can validate whether our data driven networks resemble scale-free network aspects and topology . 
The random networks consist of 519 or 595 probes , similar to the control and Salmonella infected GAN . 
The ` real ' networks and ` random ' constructed networks were compared based on their network statistics ( Suppl . 
Table S2 ) . 
Moreover a loglog-plot was made for the node degree distribution , to check visually whether ` real ' networks were scale-free ( Figure S3 ) . 
The graphs show that the ` real ' data have similar patterns to scale-free networks , which follow a power law . 
When we compared ` random ' versus ` real data ' GANs differences were observed , especially when taking the in - and outdegree of nodes into account . 
The hubs and central nodes of the ` real ' networks have more outward than inwards edges , which is expected since it indicates that when the gene expression of a central node or hub changes , all the connected genes will also change expression ( Rung et al. , 2002 ) . 
This phenomenon was not observed in the random scale-free GANs , where hubs and central nodes contained more inward edges than outward . 
Thus generating random networks helps in identifying the topological structure of scale-free networks , but in random networks the directionality of edges is ( biologically ) les relevant . 
Because nodes containing many inward edges are likely to be involved in complex interactions of this node , for example genes associated to metabolism , like amino acid biochemistry ( Rung et al. , 2002 ) . 
Although the directionality is putative , in our networks complex interactions are subordinate to regulatory interactions , because mostly outward edges are observed . 
A comparison between control and infected GANs was made to investigate differences between various network parameters ( Suppl . 
Table S2 ) . 
Most parameters are in a similar range , except for ` neighborhood connectivity ' for which in the Salmonella infected network a higher connectivity is was observed . 
This indicates a higher level of cohesiveness in the network of Salmonella infected chickens compared to the control network . 
In biological terms this suggests that the gene association network of the Salmonella infected situation contains hubs which have more or stronger interactions with other genes compared to the control situation . 
is on generating random scale-free networks , as described by Barabasi sequence using the Conserved Domain Database ( Marchler-Bauer and Albert ( Barabasi and Albert , 1999 ) , we only use component 1 . 
and Bryant , 2004 ; Marchler-Bauer et al. , 2005 ) . 
Table 1 
DAVID Functional Annotation Clustering top 10 . 
E 
GAN Functional group 
S Genes involved 
Control 
Localization/transport 3.23 Regulation of cellular component organization and 1.63 biogenesis Cell migration/motility 1.45 Calcium transport 1.45 Cellular localization ( establishment ) 1.44 Transporter activity 1.43 In folding membrane/vesicle formation 1.38 Metabolic/biosynthetic process 1.37 Channel activity/transport 1.35 Regulation of variety of activities 1.24 ( protein kinase/catalytic ) 
43 3 
8 4 
14 19 8 3 10 8 
Infected Localization/transport Fibronectin 
1.47 37 1.4 5 1.27 52 1.24 30 1.24 4 1.15 5 1.13 35 1.09 9 0.94 a 4 0.93 a 4 
Biological regulation Receptor/signal transducer activity Adhesion/integrin Regulation translation and biosynthetic process Transmembrane region Response ( immune and wounding ) Helix-loop-helix DNA-binding Tetratricopeptide region 
3.2. Functional annotation
To further validate the biological relevance of the GANs and to identify differences in gene composition and functionality between both GANs , a DAVID Functional Annotation Clustering was performed . 
Here this analysis also serves as validation of the relevance of the established networks . 
The control network consists of 519 nodes ( probes ) of which 200 map back to a gene symbol . 
However only a subset of 154 identiﬁers was recognized by DAVID . 
Similarly , in the Salmonella infected network 595 probes were present , which map back to 216 gene symbols and DAVID recognized a subset of 167 identiﬁers ( Table 1 ) . 
In both control and Salmonella infected chickens the functional group ` Localization/Transport ' has the highest Enrichment Score . 
In the control network relatively more genes were involved in metabolic processes , for example the genes represented in the metabolic related functional groups : ` Metabolic/Biosynthetic process ' ; ` Regulation of cellular component organization and biogenesis ' ; and ` Regulation of variety of activities ( protein kinase/catalytic ) ' . 
Also genes involved in regulatory processes like ` Transporter activity ' were observed . 
The control network also encompassed a number of developmentally related functional groups such as ` Cell migration/Motility ' and ` Cellular localization ( establishment ) ' . 
In the Salmonella infected network a signiﬁcant portion of the genes was also found to be involved in metabolic related process like ` Regulation translation and biosynthetic process ' , as well as regulatory processes , like ` Biological regulation ' and ` Receptor/Signal transducer activity ' . 
However , in contrast to genes residing in the control network , relatively more genes in the Salmonella infected network were involved in cell mobilization and defense mechanisms as indicated by the presence of the following functional groups ` Fibronectin ' , ` Adhesion/Integrin ' and ` Response ( immune and wounding ) ' . 
Although a high overlap of genes is present in these lists of genes present in the visualized networks , differences are observed in functional annotation clustering groups . 
3.3. Hub discovery and characteristics
For both GANs , genes that are highly connected to other genes , the so-called hub genes , were identiﬁed . 
Furthermore , a hub network was generated by visualizing the rank of each hub ( Figure S4 ) . 
To deﬁne whether these hubs encode protein domains associated with regulatory functions , like transcription factors , the hub genes were analyzed by the Conserved Domain Database ( CDD ) tool at NCBI . 
The hub network and the putative functions of hubs , based on the conserved protein domains , are depicted in Fig. 3 . 
A more detailed description of the domains and domain functions is given in Table S3 . 
As indicated in Table S3 , the control GAN contains four hub genes with conserved domains which are associated to transcriptional regulation , like the MATH_SPOP domain ( Kwon et al. , 2006 ) , TAFH 
Abbreviations : GAN , Gene Association Network ; ES , Enrichment Score . 
a In Italic are terms with an enrichment score below one and are thus not signiﬁcant . 
domain ( Wang et al. , 2007 ; Wei et al. , 2007 ) , Homeodomain ( Gehring et al. , 1994 ) and RRM domain ( Maris et al. , 2005 ) . 
In addition , four hub domains of the control network may be linked to development , Homeodomain ( Lebel et al. , 2003 ) , calponin homology domain ( Guilherme et al. , 2004 ) , kinesin motor domain ( Goldstein , 1993 ) and the BRCT domain ( Yu et al. , 2003 ) . 
The latter suggests that hubs containing these domains , regulate cell proliferation and differentiation processes . 
Two hub domains of the control network were related to metabolic functions , such as V_A-ATPase_A ( Nishi and Forgac , 2002 ) and SMI1_KNR4 ( Basmaji et al. , 2006 ) . 
Finally , two hub domains of the control GAN were associated to other processes : the ABCC_MRP_domain2 ( Ilias et al. , 2002 ) and 7tm_1 domain ( Ji et al. , 1998 ) . 
The ABCC_MRP_domain2 may participate directly in active transportation of drugs into sub cellular organelles or indirectly inﬂuence drug distribution ( Polgar and Bates , 2005 ) . 
The 7tm_1 , 7 transmembrane receptor ( rhodopsin family ) domain is involved in signal transduction in response to hormones and neurotransmitters ( Lefkowitz , 1998 ) and desensitization of receptors ( Gether and Kobilka , 1998 ) . 
However , this domain resides within the protein coding gene CXCR5 , which is known to be involved in B cell migration and localization ( Voigt et al. , 2000 ) . 
The GAN of the Salmonella infected intestinal tissue contains only one hub gene ( MGA ) with a conserved domain ( TBOX ) associated with transcriptional regulation . 
TBOX plays a critical role in development and has transcriptional regulatory activity ( Papaioannou and Silver , 1998 ) . 
In the Salmonella infected GAN relatively more conserved domain of the hubs were involved with defense and/or host protection , the IFNG ( Schoenborn and Wilson , 2007 ) , THSD1 ( Crawford et al. , 1998 ) , PTZ00009 ( Kiang and Tsokos , 1998 ) and Rab5 binding domain ( Saito et al. , 2002 ) . 
Also three conserved protein domains in 3 different hubs were identiﬁed which are possibly involved in development , such as SUN ( Fridkin et al. , 2009 ) , FH2 ( Higgs , 2005 ) and TBOX domain ( Papaioannou and Silver , 1998 ) . 
Furthermore metabolic related conserved protein domains were also present among the hub genes of the Salmonella infected GAN , like V_A-ATPase_A ( Nishi and Forgac , 2002 ) , TPR ( D'Andrea and Regan , 2003 ) , IPPK ( Ives et al. , 2000 ) , mito_carr ( SLC25A10 ) ( Palmieri , 2004 ) and Rab5 binding domain ( Saito et al. , 2002 ) . 
Some hubs observed in this GAN may have a dual function , like SH3BP4 which might b involved in metabolic processes and/or ` pathogen response/host defense ' . 
Because SH3BP4 is involved in internalization at the plasma membrane through a cargo-speciﬁc control of clathrin-mediated endocytosis , it may be involved in internalizing feed as well as bacterial components ( Rebhan et al. , 1997 ) . 
Another example is the PDZ_signaling domain , which is observed twice in the infected GAN , although in different genes , has a protein -- protein recognition module and is involved in organizing polar sites of cell -- cell communication ( Harris and Lim , 2001 ) . 
Another observation was that in the control network , in comparison to the Salmonella infected network , hubs contain domains for proteins which regulate processes in the nucleus , thus focusing the system on intracellular communication . 
However in the Salmonella infected network , hubs contained protein domains which were predominantly involved in cytoplasmic and intercellular communication . 
Fig. 3 . 
Network of top-20 ` bottleneck ' hubs , which are colored by their putative function . 
The top 20 ` bottleneck ' hubs and their ( putative ) function are depicted for control ( A ) and Salmonella infected chickens ( B ) . 
The putative functions of the hubs are categorized in different group : Metabolic ( green ) ; Transcriptional regulation ( blue ) ; Development ( yellow ) ; Defense/Host response ( red ) ; Communication ( magenta ) ; No conserved domains ( gray ) . 
For the white hubs no information is available at probe and/or domain level . 
4. Discussion
Compared to common post-genomics analyses , like gene set enrichment analyses ( GSEA ) and Gene Ontology ( GO ) analyses , the approach of inferring gene association networks ( GAN ) from genomics data has the advantage that it can take longitudinal data into account and that the data can be analyzed at the system level in time . 
In general , GANs provide a global overview of different but connected processes , but not of the underlying mechanism . 
To our knowledge GANs have thus been generated to get insight in the functional behavior of cells , but thus far not for getting insight in the behavior of complex tissues . 
In previous studies we explored different intestinal gene expression patterns in time for either control or infected chickens ( Schokker et al. , 2009 , 2010 ) . 
In the current study , a subset of genes which were signiﬁcant in the interaction of time and group ( absence or presence Salmonella ) were investigated , by inferring a gene network based on co-expression and interaction of the genes and their proteins in time with other genes . 
The established GANs of ` healthy ' and Salmonella infected chicken jejunum displayed a clear difference in topology , hubs and functionality . 
In contrast to GSEA , GAN analysis takes unknown probes into account and several of these ` unknown ' genes were identiﬁed as hub . 
Therefore GAN analyses may help to ( better ) annotate ( unknown ) genes , like performing guilt-by-association and guilt-by-proﬁling analyses as described in yeast ( Tian et al. , 2008 ) . 
4.1. Networks and hubs
The generated GANs depict gene interactions based on linear gene co-expressions in time as determined with RNA isolated from whole jejunum containing a heterogeneous pool of cells . 
As said , up to now , most GANs have been generated from homogeneous cell population ( Amit et al. , 2009 ) . 
Here , we attempted to generate informative GANs for tissues that are highly dynamic and complex in terms of cell differentiation , cell function and cellular composition , and explored whether these GANs represent systems behavior . 
For that purpose we used two highly contrasting environmental conditions : a normal developing intestine and a developing intestine disturbed by a Salmonella infection . 
To focus on the major differences between the systems , stringent cut-off values were taken for the selection of genes that served as input for the GANs . 
This choice was also made because direct validation of the GANs representing complex systems is not possible for the moment . 
Our results demonstrate that through GAN analysis , it is indeed possible to obtain a ﬁrst global view of highly regulated processes and the connectivity between them . 
We have several reasons that strengthen us to believe that the GANs represent , at least a part of , the biological behavior of the intestinal system . 
1 ) The results of the functional analysis of GANs , are in agreement with earlier knowledge on development and effect of Salmonella infection from previous studies ( Withanage et al. , 2004 , 2005 ; van Hemert et al. , 2006a , 2007 ; Cheeseman et al. , 2007 ; Schokker et al. , 2009 , 2010 ) . 
2 ) The proposed functional properties of hubs are in line with expectations , in which hubs are involved in processes like transcriptional regulation or intra - and extracellular communication . 
3 ) The topology of the established networks represents the topology of random scale-fre networks with network centrality parameters which are expected for networks representing real biological phenomena . 
We realize that our results require additional validation of the wiring and functions of the proposed association networks and the role of the proposed hubs in controlling the major system responses using independent methods . 
In principle , validation may be performed by promoter binding and correlated gene expression studies . 
However , such approaches are limited in their ability to validate models of transcriptional networks . 
A complementary strategy is to systematically perturb the expression of all the identiﬁed key regulator genes and monitoring the resulting cellular transcriptional responses , especially the change in the expression proﬁle of the associated genes . 
This strategy has been successfully used in a cell-based mammalian system using mouse primary dendritic cells ( Amit et al. , 2009 ) . 
In such cellular systems gene perturbations can be performed by the use of large-scale RNAi perturbation experiments . 
In multicellular systems validation of transcriptional models depends on the availability of large collections of gene deletion mutants ( Giaever et al. , 2002 ) and studying their effect on the expression of associated target genes . 
Unfortunately , in this case such validations are currently impossible to perform , because of the complexity of the used biological system and the lack of speciﬁc knockout and knock-down mutants for chicken . 
The results of future studies focusing on genotype -- phenotype relationships at the level of gene expression ( eQTL ) in different breeding lines may , however , be used for validation of the results presented here . 
B 
Fig. 3 . 
Network of top-20 ` bottleneck ' hubs , which are colored by their putative function . 
The top 20 ` bottleneck ' hubs and their ( putative ) function are depicted for control ( A ) and Salmonella infected chickens ( B ) . 
The putative functions of the hubs are categorized in different group : Metabolic ( green ) ; Transcriptional regulation ( blue ) ; Development ( yellow ) ; Defense/Host response ( red ) ; Communication ( magenta ) ; No conserved domains ( gray ) . 
For the white hubs no information is available at probe and/or domain level . 
4.2. Network characteristics
At the time of these analyses , different methods were available to infer GANs , for example Bayesian and graphical Gaussian models ( GGM ) . 
However in Bayesian networks it is impossible to incorporate cyclic regulations , like feedback loops ( Kim et al. , 2003 ) . 
These feedback loops have important biological functions , like ensuring homeostasis ( negative feedback loops ) or multistationarity ( positive feedback loops ) ( Thomas et al. , 1995 ) . 
Approaches like dynamic Bayesian networks ( DBNs ) and GGM do not have these limitations ( Schafer and Strimmer , 2005a ) and the latter approach is very useful for the screening of causal relationships ( Kim et al. , 2003 ) . 
We used the GeneNet package ( Schafer and Strimmer , 2005a , b ; Opgen-Rhein and Strimmer , 2007a , b ) for inferring the data driven networks , because time-course data can be explicitly declared , although other methods do exist , like ` LASSO ' ( Friedman et al. , 2008 ) and ` minet ' ( Meyer et al. , 2008 ) . 
The network topologies of the control and the infected networks were quite different , suggesting a well-orchestrated system response under both conditions . 
Both networks displayed the characteristic features of biologically relevant networks , due to their differences when compared to the random scale-free networks . 
Both GANs showed a complex connectivity between genes . 
Our results suggest that major ( high level ) signaling events in complex tissues do not cascade only via known biochemical pathways , but also occur via other unknown ( indirect ) routes that we do not understand yet . 
Apparently hubs play an important role in signaling ; subtle alterations in expression of hubs may result in functional changes of the system . 
4.3. Functional annotation clustering
Functional clustering of the nodes present in both GANs indicated different functionality and system behavior , generally in agreement with current knowledge . 
Because of the poor annotation of the chicken genome , we used human orthologues in the functional analyses . 
Nevertheless the functional clustering data give insight in global processes which differ between control and infected chickens . 
The control GAN is primarily dominated by genes and processes related to metabolism and development . 
This is plausible because in the developing small intestine digestion and absorption of food takes place , as well as maturation ( Geyra et al. , 2001 ) . 
The developmental processes are absent from the high ranking functional groups of the network in Salmonella infected chickens . 
Instead , the Salmonella infected GAN is dominated by genes and processes involved in metabolic and ` defense/pathogen ' responses . 
This observation is supported by the results of previous studies ( Withanage et al. , 2004 , 2005 ; van Hemert et al. , 2006a , 2007 ; Cheeseman et al. , 2007 ; Schokker et al. , 2009 , 2010 ) . 
Furthermore the Salmonella GAN clearly shows the activity of a number of metabolic related processes , for example ` Localization/transport ' . 
Apparently , digestion and absorption of food continues to take place , in both control and infected animals , although the genes involved displayed different expression patterns between control and Salmonella infected conditions . 
The functional groups ` Fibronectin ' , ` Adhesion and/or integrin ' and ` Response ( immune and wounding ) ' were found to be typical for the Salmonella infected GAN , indicating that the behavior of the systems in a ` Salmonella environment ' has a major focus on the invading pathogen . 
Due to these observations we believe that the networks represent relevant biological behavior . 
4.4. Hub discovery and characteristics
Hubs are known to determine the behavior of the system ( Barabasi and Oltvai , 2004 ) . 
By identifying hubs and characterizing their conserved protein domains ( Suppl . 
Table S3 ) , we obtained some more insight in the functions of the hubs . 
Strikingly , although a similar probe set was used for generating the networks , only two genes are represented in both top 20 hub lists : ATP6V1A and ` 524 ' ( probe identiﬁer : A_87_P030550 ) . 
This explains the shift in topology between the control GAN and the infected GAN and is in line with a number of other transcriptional studies ( Withanage et al. , 2004 , 2005 ; van Hemert et al. , 2006a , 2007 ; Cheeseman et al. , 2007 ; Chiang et al. , 2008 ; Zhang et al. , 2008 ) , where a comparison is made between control and Salmonella infected chickens , all showing that perturbation with Salmonella has clear and signiﬁcant effects . 
However , in the latter studies , the observed differences were based on observations on a ﬁxed moment in time , whereas the GeneNet package takes into account that the data is temporal . 
Apparently , genes that function as major hubs in the control situation and that drive the behavior of the developing intestine are replaced or dominated by other hubs , in the Salmonella infected state . 
These hubs drive the intestinal system towards an adaptation to the new environment to optimize its ` health and functionality ' . 
Many of the hubs in the control situation are transcriptional regulators , like transcription factors . 
Transcription factors are important regulators of the ﬂow of transcription within host cells , an example are the Hox genes which are involved in specifying the body plan and regulating the host development ( Gehring et al. , 1994 ) . 
In the top 20 of hubs in control chickens , the IRX2 gene was present , which contains a homeodomain and is likely to be involved in developmental processes . 
Furthermore the gene C18orf10 is involved in cell-wall formation and TOPBP1 which is associated to cell cycle checkpoint , indicate that the hubs found in the control situation are involved with developmental processes . 
Several hubs residing in the Salmonella infected GAN have functions which are potentially involved in communication and cell signaling molecules . 
This suggests that in the control situation the major emphasis of the system is on the regulation of intracellular processes , whereas in the Salmonella infected situation nuclear regulation is reduced and replaced by cytoplasmic as well as extracellular regulation mechanisms . 
This suggests that on the systems level a shift from cellular activity and differentiation towards tissue remodeling and cell mobilization occurs . 
Although these results are not surprising by themselves , it demonstrates the value of the use of GAN analysis for whole tissue gene expression data . 
The possibility for identiﬁcation of hubs or high level regulators , as shown in this study , may be of help in the selection of potential targets to modulat intestinal health and development , but also for modulation , prevention and/or treatment of intestinal perturbations . 
This requires the targeting of selected hub genes either by feeding , vaccination , and/or breeding strategies , which as indicated by the present study , may not be limited to immune-related genes . 
Acknowledgments
These results are obtained through the EC-funded FP6 Integrated Project SABRE -- Cutting Edge Genomics for Farm Animal Breeding ( contract no . 
FOOD-CT-2006-016250 ) , EADGENE ( contract no . 
FOOD-CT-2004-506416 ) and IP/OP : Systems Biology ﬁnancially supported by the Ministry of Agriculture , Nature and Food Quality ( BAS no. 4434660800 ) . 
The text represents the authors ' views and does not necessarily represent a position of the Commission , who will not be liable for the use made of such information . 
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at doi :10 . 
1016/j . 
cbd .2011.07.004 . 
References 
Albert , R. , 2005 . 
Scale-free networks in cell biology . 
J. Cell Sci . 
118 , 4947 -- 4957 . 
Amit , I. , Garber , M. , Chevrier , N. , Leite , A.P. , Donner , Y. , Eisenhaure , T. , Guttman , M. , Grenier , J.K. , Li , W.B. , Zuk , O. , Schubert , L.A. , Birditt , B. , Shay , T. , Goren , A. , Zhang , X.L. , Smith , Z. , Deering , R. , McDonald , R.C. , Cabili , M. , Bernstein , B.E. , Rinn , J.L. , Meissner , A. , Root , D.E. , Hacohen , N. , Regev , A. , 2009 . 
Unbiased reconstruction of a mammalian transcriptional network mediating pathogen responses . 
Science 326 , 257 -- 263 . 
Barabasi , A.L. , Albert , R. , 1999 . 
Emergence of scaling in random networks . 
Science 286 , 509 -- 512 . 
Barabasi , A.L. , Oltvai , Z.N. , 2004 . 
Network biology : understanding the cell 's functional organization . 
Nat . 
Rev. Genet . 
5 , 101 -- 113 . 
Barrow , P.A. , Huggins , M.B. , Lovell , M.A. , Simpson , J.M. , 1987 . 
Observations on the pathogenesis of experimental Salmonella typhimurium infection in chickens . 
Res . 
Vet . 
Sci . 
42 , 194 -- 199 . 
Basmaji , F. , Martin-Yken , H. , Durand , F. , Dagkessamanskaia , A. , Pichereaux , C. , Rossignol , M. , Francois , J. , 2006 . 
The ` interactome ' of the Knr4/Smi1 , a protein implicated in coordinating cell wall synthesis with bud emergence in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . 
Mol . 
Genet . 
Genomics 275 , 217 -- 230 . 
Chappell , L. , Kaiser , P. , Barrow , P. , Jones , M.A. , Johnston , C. , Wigley , P. , 2009 . 
The immunobiology of avian systemic salmonellosis . 
Vet . 
Immunol . 
Immunopathol . 
128 , 53 -- 59 . 
Cheeseman , J.H. , Kaiser , M.G. , Ciraci , C. , Kaiser , P. , Lamont , S.J. , 2007 . 
Breed effect on early cytokine mRNA expression in spleen and cecum of chickens with and without Salmonella enteritidis infection . 
Dev . 
Comp . 
Immunol . 
31 , 52 -- 60 . 
Chiang , H.I. , Swaggerty , C.L. , Kogut , M.H. , Dowd , S.E. , Li , X. , Pevzner , I.Y. , Zhou , H. , 2008 . 
Gene expression proﬁling in chicken heterophils with Salmonella enteritidis stimulation using a chicken 44 K Agilent microarray . 
BMC Genomics 9 , 526 . 
Crawford , S.E. , Stellmach , V. , Murphy-Ullrich , J.E. , Ribeiro , S.M.F. , Lawler , J. , Hynes , R.O. , Boivin , G.P. , Bouck , N. , 1998 . 
Thrombospondin-1 is a major activator of TGF-beta 1 in vivo . 
Cell 93 , 1159 -- 1170 . 
D'Andrea , L.D. , Regan , L. , 2003 . 
TPR proteins : the versatile helix . 
Trends Biochem . 
Sci . 
28 , 655 -- 662 . 
Dennis , G. , Sherman , B.T. , Hosack , D.A. , Yang , J. , Gao , W. , Lane , H.C. , Lempicki , R.A. , 2003 . 
DAVID : Database for annotation , visualization , and integrated discovery . 
Genome Biol . 
4 . 
Fridkin , A. , Penkner , A. , Jantsch , V. , Gruenbaum , Y. , 2009 . 
SUN-domain and KASH-domain proteins during development , meiosis and disease . 
Cell . 
Mol . 
Life Sci . 
66 , 1518 -- 1533 . 
Friedman , J. , Hastie , T. , Tibshirani , R. , 2008 . 
Sparse inverse covariance estimation with the graphical lasso . 
Biostatistics 9 , 432 -- 441 . 
Gehring , W.J. , Affolter , M. , Burglin , T. , 1994 . 
Homeodomain proteins . 
Annu . 
Rev. Biochem . 
63 , 487 -- 526 . 
Gether , U. , Kobilka , B.K. , 1998 . 
G protein-coupled receptors -- II . 
Mechanism of agonist activation . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
273 , 17979 -- 17982 . 
Geyra , A. , Uni , Z. , Sklan , D. , 2001 . 
Enterocyte dynamics and mucosal development in the posthatch chick . 
Poult . 
Sci . 
80 , 776 -- 782 . 
Giaever , G. , Chu , A.M. , Ni , L. , Connelly , C. , Riles , L. , Veronneau , S. , Dow , S. , Lucau-Danila , A. , Anderson , K. , Andre , B. , Arkin , A.P. , Astromoff , A. , El-Bakkoury , M. , Bangham , R. , Benito , R. , Brachat , S. , Campanaro , S. , Curtiss , M. , Davis , K. , Deutschbauer , A. , Entian , K.D. , Flaherty , P. , Foury , F. , Garﬁnkel , D.J. , Gerstein , M. , Gotte , D. , Guldener , U. , Hegemann , J.H. , Hempel , S. , Herman , Z. , Jaramillo , D.F. , Kelly , D.E. , Kelly , S.L. , Kotter , P. , LaBonte , D. , Lamb , D.C. , Lan , N. , Liang , H. , Liao , H. , Liu , L. , Luo , C. , Lussier , M. , Mao , R. , Menard , P. , Ooi , S.L. , Revuelta , J.L. , Roberts , C.J. , Rose , M. , Ross-Macdonald , P. , Scherens , B. , Schimmack , G. , Shafer , B. , Shoemaker , D.D. , Sookhai-Mahadeo , S. , Storms , R.K. , Strathern , J.N. , Valle , G. , Voet , M. , Volckaert , G. , Wang , C.Y. , Ward , T.R. , 
Wilhelmy , J. , Winzeler , E.A. , Yang , Y. , Yen , G. , Youngman , E. , Yu , K. , Bussey , H. , Boeke , J.D. , Snyder , M. , Philippsen , P. , Davis , R.W. , Johnston , M. , 2002 . 
Functional proﬁling of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome . 
Nature 418 , 387 -- 391 . 
Gish , W. , States , D.J. , 1993 . 
Identiﬁcation of protein coding regions by database similarity search . 
Nat . 
Genet . 
3 , 266 -- 272 . 
Goldstein , L.S. , 1993 . 
With apologies to scheherazade : tails of 1001 kinesin motors . 
Annu . 
Rev. Genet . 
27 , 319 -- 351 . 
Guilherme , A. , Soriano , N.A. , Bose , S. , Holik , J. , Bose , A. , Pomerleau , D.P. , Furcinitti , P. , Leszyk , J. , Corvera , S. , Czech , M.P. , 2004 . 
EHD2 and the novel EH domain binding protein EHBP1 couple endocytosis to the actin cytoskeleton . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
279 , 10593 -- 10605 . 
Harris , B.Z. , Lim , W.A. , 2001 . 
Mechanism and role of PDZ domains in signaling complex assembly . 
J. Cell Sci . 
114 , 3219 -- 3231 . 
Higgs , H.N. , 2005 . 
Formin proteins : a domain-based approach . 
Trends Biochem . 
Sci . 
30 , 342 -- 353 . 
Huang , D.W. , Sherman , B.T. , Tan , Q. , Collins , J.R. , Alvord , W.G. , Roayaei , J. , Stephens , R. , Baseler , M.W. , Lane , H.C. , Lempicki , R.A. , 2007 . 
The DAVID Gene Functional Classiﬁcation Tool : a novel biological module-centric algorithm to functionally analyze large gene lists . 
Genome Biol . 
8 ( 9 ) , R183 . 
Ilias , A. , Urban , Z. , Seidl , T.L. , Le Saux , O. , Sinko , E. , Boyd , C.D. , Sarkadi , B. , Varadi , A. , 2002 . 
Loss of ATP-dependent transport activity in pseudoxanthoma elasticum-associated mutants of human ABCC6 ( MRP6 ) . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
277 , 16860 -- 16867 . 
Ives , E.B. , Nichols , J. , Wente , S.R. , York , J.D. , 2000 . 
Biochemical and functional characterization of inositol 1,3,4,5,6-pentakisphosphate 2-kinases . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
275 , 36575 -- 36583 . 
Ji , T.H. , Grossmann , M. , Ji , I.H. , 1998 . 
G protein-coupled receptors I. Diversity of receptor-ligand interactions . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
273 , 17299 -- 17302 . 
Johnson , M. , Zaretskaya , I. , Raytselis , Y. , Merezhuk , Y. , McGinnis , S. , Madden , T.L. , 2008 . 
NCBI BLAST : a better web interface . 
Nucleic Acids Res . 
36 , W5 -- W9 . 
Kaiser , M.G. , Cheesernan , J.H. , Kaiser , P. , Lamont , S.J. , 2006 . 
Cytokine expression in chicken peripheral blood mononuclear cells after in vitro exposure to Salmonella enterica serovar enteritidis . 
Poult . 
Sci . 
85 , 1907 -- 1911 . 
Kiang , J.G. , Tsokos , G.C. , 1998 . 
Heat shock protein 70 kDa : molecular biology , biochemistry , and physiology . 
Pharmacol . 
Ther . 
80 , 183 -- 201 . 
Kim , S.Y. , Imoto , S. , Miyano , S. , 2003 . 
Inferring gene networks from time series microarray data using dynamic Bayesian networks . 
Brief Bioinform . 
4 , 228 -- 235 . 
Kogut , M.H. , Tellez , G.I. , McGruder , E.D. , Hargis , B.M. , Williams , J.D. , Corrier , D.E. , DeLoach , J.R. , 1994 . 
Heterophils are decisive components in the early responses of chickens to Salmonella enteritidis infections . 
Microb . 
Pathog . 
16 , 141 -- 151 . 
Kwon , J.E. , La , M. , Oh , K.H. , Oh , Y.M. , Kim , G.R. , Seol , J.H. , Baek , S.H. , Chiba , T. , Tanaka , K. , Bang , O.S. , Joe , C.O. , Chung , C.H. , 2006 . 
BTB domain-containing speckle-type POZ protein ( SPOP ) serves as an adaptor of Daxx for ubiquitination by Cul3-based ubiquitin ligase . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
281 , 12664 -- 12672 . 
Lebel , M. , Agarwal , P. , Cheng , C.W. , Kabir , M.G. , Chan , T.Y. , Thanabalasingham , V. , Zhang , X. , Cohen , D.R. , Husain , M. , Cheng , S.H. , Bruneau , B.G. , Hui , C.C. , 2003 . 
The Iroquois homeobox gene Irx2 is not essential for normal development of the heart and midbrain-hindbrain boundary in mice . 
Mol . 
Cell . 
Biol . 
23 , 8216 -- 8225 . 
Lefkowitz , R.J. , 1998 . 
G protein-coupled receptors III . 
New roles for receptor kinases and beta-arrestins in receptor signaling and desensitization . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
273 , 18677 -- 18680 . 
Lin , C.Y. , Chin , C.H. , Wu , H.H. , Chen , S.H. , Ho , C.W. , Ko , M.T. , 2008 . 
Hubba : hub objects analyzer -- a framework of interactome hubs identiﬁcation for network biology . 
Nucleic Acids Res . 
36 , W438 -- W443 . 
Marchler-Bauer , A. , Bryant , S.H. , 2004 . 
CD-Search : protein domain annotations on the ﬂy . 
Nucleic Acids Res . 
32 , W327 -- W331 . 
Marchler-Bauer , A. , Anderson , J.B. , Cherukuri , P.F. , DeWeese-Scott , C. , Geer , L.Y. , Gwadz , M. , He , S. , Hurwitz , D.I. , Jackson , J.D. , Ke , Z. , Lanczycki , C.J. , Liebert , C.A. , Liu , C. , Lu , F. , Marchler , G.H. , Mullokandov , M. , Shoemaker , B.A. , Simonyan , V. , Song , J.S. , Thiessen , P.A. , Yamashita , R.A. , Yin , J.J. , Zhang , D. , Bryant , S.H. , 2005 . 
CDD : a Conserved Domain Database for protein classiﬁcation . 
Nucleic Acids Res . 
33 , D192 -- D196 . 
Maris , C. , Dominguez , C. , Allain , F.H.T. , 2005 . 
TheRNArecognition motif , a plastic RNA-binding platform to regulate post-transcriptional gene expression . 
FEBS J. 272 , 2118 -- 2131 . 
Meyer , P.E. , Laﬁtte , F. , Bontempi , G. , 2008 . 
minet : A R/Bioconductor package for inferring large transcriptional networks using mutual information . 
BMC Bioinforma . 
9 , 461 . 
Morgulis , A. , Coulouris , G. , Raytselis , Y. , Madden , T.L. , Agarwala , R. , Schaffer , A.A. , 2008 . 
Database indexing for production MegaBLAST searches . 
Bioinformatics 24 , 1757 -- 1764 . 
Nishi , T. , Forgac , M. , 2002 . 
The vacuolar ( H + ) - ATPases -- nature 's most versatile proton pumps . 
Nat . 
Rev. Mol . 
Cell Biol . 
3 , 94 -- 103 . 
Opgen-Rhein , R. , Strimmer , K. , 2007a . 
From correlation to causation networks : a simple approximate learning algorithm and its application to high-dimensional plant gene expression data . 
BMC Syst . 
Biol . 
1 , 37 . 
Opgen-Rhein , R. , Strimmer , K. , 2007b . 
Learning causal networks from systems biology time course data : an effective model selection procedure for the vector autoregressive process . 
BMC Bioinforma . 
8 ( Suppl . 
2 ) , S3 . 
Palmieri , F. , 2004 . 
The mitochondrial transporter family ( SLC25 ) : physiological and pathological implications . 
Pﬂugers Arch . 
Eur . 
J. Physiol . 
447 , 689 -- 709 . 
Papaioannou , V.E. , Silver , L.M. , 1998 . 
The T-box gene family . 
Bioessays 20 , 9 -- 19 . 
Polgar , O. , Bates , S.E. , 2005 . 
ABC transporters in the balance : is there a role in multidrug resistance ? 
Biochem . 
Soc . 
Trans . 
33 , 241 -- 245 . 
Przulj , N. , Wigle , D.A. , Jurisica , I. , 2004 . 
Functional topology in a network of protein interactions . 
Bioinformatics 20 , 340 -- 348 . 
Rebhan , M. , ChalifaCaspi , V. , Prilusky , J. , Lancet , D. , 1997 . 
GeneCards : Integrating information about genes , proteins and diseases . 
Trends Genet . 
13 , 163 
Rung , J. , Schlitt , T. , Brazma , A. , Freivalds , K. , Vilo , J. , 2002 . 
Building and analysing genome-wide gene disruption networks . 
Bioinformatics 18 ( Suppl . 
2 ) , S202 -- S210 . 
Saito , K. , Murai , J. , Kajiho , H. , Kontani , K. , Kurosu , H. , Katada , T. , 2002 . 
A novel binding protein composed of homophilic tetramer exhibits unique properties for the small GTPase Rab5 . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
277 , 3412 -- 3418 . 
Scardoni , G. , Petterlini , M. , Laudanna , C. , 2009 . 
Analyzing biological network parameters with CentiScaPe . 
Bioinformatics 25 , 2857 -- 2859 . 
Schafer , J. , Strimmer , K. , 2005a . 
An empirical Bayes approach to inferring large-scale gene association networks . 
Bioinformatics 21 , 754 -- 764 . 
Schafer , J. , Strimmer , K. , 2005b . 
A shrinkage approach to large-scale covariance matrix estimation and implications for functional genomics . 
Stat . 
Appl . 
Genet . 
Mol . 
Biol . 
4 ( Article 32 ) . 
Schoenborn , J.R. , Wilson , C.B. , 2007 . 
Regulation of interferon-gamma during innate and adaptive immune responses . 
Adv. Immunol . 
96 ( 96 ) , 41 -- 101 . 
Schokker , D. , Hoekman , A.J. , Smits , M.A. , Rebel , J.M. , 2009 . 
Gene expression patterns associated with chicken jejunal development . 
Dev . 
Comp . 
Immunol . 
33 , 1156 -- 1164 . 
Schokker , D. , Smits , M.A. , Hoekman , A.J. , Parmentier , H.K. , Rebel , J.M. , 2010 . 
Effects of Salmonella on spatial-temporal processes of jejunal development in chickens . 
Dev . 
Comp . 
Immunol . 
34 , 1090 -- 1100 . 
Shannon , P. , Markiel , A. , Ozier , O. , Baliga , N.S. , Wang , J.T. , Ramage , D. , Amin , N. , Schwikowski , B. , Ideker , T. , 2003 . 
Cytoscape : a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks . 
Genome Res . 
13 , 2498 -- 2504 . 
Shaw , R.G. , Mitchellolds , T. , 1993 . 
Anova for Unbalanced Data -- an Overview . 
Ecology 74 , 1638 -- 1645 . 
Speed , F.M. , Hocking , R.R. , Hackney , O.P. , 1978 . 
Methods of analysis of linear-models with unbalanced data . 
J. Am . 
Stat . 
Assoc. 73 , 105 -- 112 . 
Stajich , J.E. , Block , D. , Boulez , K. , Brenner , S.E. , Chervitz , S.A. , Dagdigian , C. , Fuellen , G. , Gilbert , J.G.R. , Korf , I. , Lapp , H. , Lehvaslaiho , H. , Matsalla , C. , Mungall , C.J. , Osborne , B.I. , Pocock , M.R. , Schattner , P. , Senger , M. , Stein , L.D. , Stupka , E. , Wilkinson , M.D. , Birney , E. , 2002 . 
The bioperl toolkit : Perl modules for the life sciences . 
Genome Res . 
12 , 1611 -- 1618 . 
Suzuki , S. , 1994 . 
Pathogenicity of Salmonella enteritidis in poultry . 
Int . 
J. Food Microbiol . 
21 , 89 -- 105 . 
Thomas , R. , Thieffry , D. , Kaufman , M. , 1995 . 
Dynamical behaviour of biological regulatory networks -- I. Biological role of feedback loops and practical use of the concept of the loop-characteristic state . 
Bull . 
Math . 
Biol . 
57 , 247 -- 276 . 
Tian , W. , Zhang , L.V. , Tasan , M. , Gibbons , F.D. , King , O.D. , Park , J. , Wunderlich , Z. , Cherry , J.M. , Roth , F.P. , 2008 . 
Combining guilt-by-association and guilt-by-proﬁling to predict Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene function . 
Genome Biol . 
9 ( Suppl . 
1 ) , S7 . 
van Hemert , S. , Hoekman , A.J.W. , Smits , M.A. , Rebel , J.M.J. , 2006a . 
Early host gene expression responses to a Salmonella infection in the intestine of chickens with different genetic background examined with cDNA and oligonucleotide micro-arrays . 
Comp . 
Biochem . 
Physiol . 
D 292 -- 299 . 
van Hemert , S. , Hoekman , A.J.W. , Smits , M.A. , Rebel , J.M.J. , 2006b . 
Gene expression responses to a Salmonella infection in the chicken intestine differ between lines . 
Vet . 
Immunol . 
Immunopathol . 
114 , 247 -- 258 . 
Van Hemert , S. , Hoekman , A.J.W. , Smits , M.A. , Rebel , J.M.J. , 2007 . 
Immunological and gene expression responses to a Salmonella infection in the chicken intestine . 
Vet . 
Res . 
38 , 51 -- 63 . 
van Zijderveld , F.G. , van Zijderveld-van Bemmel , A.M. , Anakotta , J. , 1992 . 
Comparison of four different enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays for serological diagnosis of Salmonella enteritidis infections in experimentally infected chickens . 
J. Clin . 
Microbiol . 
30 , 2560 -- 2566 . 
Voigt , I. , Camacho , S.A. , de Boer , B.A. , Lipp , M. , Forster , R. , Berek , C. , 2000 . 
CXCR5-deﬁcient mice develop functional germinal centers in the splenic T cell zone . 
Eur . 
J. Immunol . 
30 , 560 -- 567 . 
Wang , X. , Truckses , D.M. , Takada , S. , Matsumura , T. , Tanese , N. , Jacobson , R.H. , 2007 . 
Conserved region I of human coactivator TAF4 binds to a short hydrophobic motif present in transcriptional regulators . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
U. S. A. 104 , 7839 -- 7844 . 
Wei , Y. , Liu , S. , Lausen , J. , Woodrell , C. , Cho , S. , Biris , N. , Kobayashi , N. , Yokoyama , S. , Werner , M.H. , 2007 . 
A TAF4-homology domain from the corepressor ETO is a docking platform for positive and negative regulators of transcription . 
Nat . 
Struct . 
Mol . 
Biol . 
14 , 653 -- 661 . 
Withanage , G.S. , Kaiser , P. , Wigley , P. , Powers , C. , Mastroeni , P. , Brooks , H. , Barrow , P. , Smith , A. , Maskell , D. , McConnell , I. , 2004 . 
Rapid expression of chemokines and proinﬂammatory cytokines in newly hatched chickens infected with Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
72 , 2152 -- 2159 . 
Withanage , G.S.K. , Wigley , P. , Kaiser , P. , Mastroeni , P. , Brooks , H. , Powers , C. , Beal , R. , Barrow , P. , Maskell , D. , McConnell , I. , 2005 . 
Cytokine and chemokine responses associated with clearance of a primary Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium infection in the chicken and in protective immunity to rechallenge . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
73 , 5173 -- 5182 . 
Yu , X. , Chini , C.C. , He , M. , Mer , G. , Chen , J. , 2003 . 
The BRCT domain is a phospho-protein binding domain . 
Science 302 , 639 -- 642 . 
Zhang , S. , Lillehoj , H.S. , Kim , C.H. , Keeler Jr. , C.L. , Babu , U. , Zhang , M.Z. , 2008 . 
Transcriptional response of chicken macrophages to Salmonella enterica serovar enteritidis infection . 
Dev . 
Biol . 
( Basel ) 132 , 141 -- 151 . 
Zhou , H. , Lamont , S.J. , 2007 . 
Global gene expression proﬁle after Salmonella enterica Serovar enteritidis challenge in two F8 advanced intercross chicken lines . 
Cytogenet Genome Res . 
117 , 131 -- 138