Ph s hoproteomic nalysis Salmonella-Infected Cells Identifies K Kinase R gulators a d So B-Dep ost Pho horylation
Salmonella enterica is a foodborne , facultative intracellular bacterium that causes gastroenteritis and typhoid fever leading to considerable human morbidity and mortality ( 1 ) . 
The various serovars ( antigenically distinct members of the same species ) of S. enterica have evolved intricate mechanisms for evading host immunity , whereby the pathogen induces its own internalization into a membrane-bound vacuole termed the Salmonella-containing vacuole , which evades degradation within host cells ( 2 , 3 ) . 
Effector proteins , translocated into host cells by two type III secretion systems ( T3SSs ) encoded on Salmonella pathogenicity islands 1 and 2 ( SPI-1 and SPI-2 ) , control the formation and maturation of the Salmonella-containing vacuole ( 4 ) . 
Whereas T3SS-2 acts at later stages of infection to direct trafficking of and bacterial replication within the Salmonella-containing vacuole , T3SS-1 effectors are translocated into the host cytosol immediately upon contact with the host cell . 
T3SS-1 effectors target Rho family guanosine triphosphatases ( GTPases ) and actin-binding proteins to induce membrane ruffling , macropinocytosis , and nuclear responses leading to inflammation ( 5 -- 7 ) . 
They also regulate bacterial replication and trafficking of the Salmonellacontaining vacuole and host functions such as cell death , ion secretion , and cell signaling through phospholipids , as well as protein phosphorylation , acetylation , and ubiquitylation ( 8 -- 11 ) . 
The phosphoinositide phosphatase SopB and the guanine nucleotide exchange factors SopE and SopE2 ( SopE/E2 ) activate cell division control protein 42 ( Cdc42 ) to induce downstream signaling through c-Jun N-terminal kinase ( JNK ) and mitogen-activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) p38 isoforms , leading to proinflammatory cytokine production ( 12 ) . 
SopB also activates protein kinase B ( also known as Akt ) , which induces antiapoptotic signaling , while also stimulating p21-activated kinase 4 ( PAK4 ) and inactivating a GTPase-activating protein ( GAP ) for Ras-related protein Rab-14 ( Rab14 ) ( 13 , 14 ) . 
Conversely , the effector SptP ( which is a GAP and protein-tyrosine phosphatase ) inactivates the kinase RAF and dephosphorylates transitional endoplasmic reticulum adenosine triphosphatase ( ATPase ) ( VCP ) , and SspH1 binds protein serine-threonine kinase N1 ( PKN1 ) to inhibit nuclear factor kB ( NFkB ) -- dependent gene expression ( 15 -- 17 ) . 
Finally , AvrA also inhibits MAPKs through acetylation and prevents NFkB activation by deubiquitylating NFkB inhibitors ( IkBs ) ( 18 , 19 ) . 
SipA also induces protein kinase C ( PKC ) activation , leading to transepithelial migration of polymorphonuclear lymphocytes ( 20 -- 22 ) . 
However , activation of PKC by SipA is indirect , and the signaling components of this pathway remain largely uncharacterized . 
Although reductionist approaches have been used successfully to identify these signaling events , advances in global proteomics techniques , such as metal oxide chromatography ( MOC ) , now make systems-level tracking of protein phosphorylation possible ( 23 , 24 ) . 
These methods , in combination with stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture ( SILAC ) , can resolve protein phosphorylation events in space and time ( 25 ) . 
Here , we apply quantitative phosphoproteomics to measure more than 9500 phosphorylation events in an epithelial cell line during the initial 20 min after Salmonella infection . 
We have identified host pathways that are regulated during infection , as well as important distinctions between ligand receptor -- induced and bacteria-induced signaling dynamics . 
Many of the changes induced by wild-type S. enterica serovar Typhimurium ( S. Typhimurium ) were functionally validated with a strain lacking the T3SS-1 effector SopB . 
Hundreds of dynamic host phosphorylation events were dependent on SopB , reflecting its wide-reaching impact on bacteria-induced signaling . 
1Centre for High-Throughput Biology and Department of Biochemistry , University of British Columbia , Vancouver , British Columbia V6T 1Z4 , Canada . 
2Department of Microbiology and Immunology , University of Melbourne , Melbourne , Victoria 3010 , Australia . 
3Department of Medicine , University of British Co-lumbia , Vancouver , British Columbia V5Z 1M9 , Canada . 
4Kinexus Bioinformatics Corporation , Suite 1 , 8755 Ash Street , Vancouver , British Columbia V6P 6T3 , Canada . 
* To whom correspondence should be addressed . 
E-mail : foster@chibi.ubc.ca 
RESULTS
Quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis of host cell signaling during Salmonella invasion
For phosphoproteomics analysis , three HeLa cell populations were labeled with light , medium , and heavy isotopologs of lysine and arginine for SILAC quantitation ( fig . 
S1 ) . 
Light-labeled populations were mock-infected , whereas medium - and heavy-labeled populations were infected with wildtype or DsopB strains for the various times indicated . 
Cells were lysed ; separated into nuclear , membrane , and cytosolic fractions ; and solubilized in detergent . 
Equal masses of protein from each SILAC label and fraction were combined , digested with trypsin , and fractionated by in-solution isoelectric focusing ( IEF ) , and phosphopeptides were enriched by MOC ( 24 ) . 
Biological replicates of each experiment each yielded 30 samples for liquid chromatography -- tandem mass spectrometry ( LC-MS/MS ) . 
Three independent biological replicates were analyzed after infection with wildtype S. Typhimurium , and two independent biological replicates were analyzed after infection with the DsopB strain . 
Together , 1973 phosphorylated proteins were identified with a false discovery rate of 1 % , corresponding to 6893 nonredundant phosphopeptides and 9508 nonredundant phosphorylation sites ( table S1 ; http://www . 
phosphonet.ca ) . 
The dynamic profiles measured appeared to be accurate because the average coefficient of variation ( XCV ) across biological rep-licates was < 15 % ( table S1 ) . 
More than 85 % of phosphopeptides were quantified in at least one experiment , and 61 , 43 , and 49 % of these were identified in the nuclear , membrane , and cytosolic fractions , respectively . 
The distribution of phosphorylation events between Ser , Thr , and Tyr was 82:15:3 , similar to a previous report ( 26 ) , and highly correlated with the overall 80:16:4 ratio for all phosphorylation sites observed in PhosphoNET ( http://www.phosphonet.ca ) . 
At least 24 % of detected phosphopeptides showed altered phosphorylation during infection . 
Fuzzy c-means ( FCM ) clustering of the regulated profiles generated four clusters containing peptides with increased phosphorylation and two containing peptides with decreased phosphoryl-ation ( Fig. 1A ) . 
The clusters of peptides with increased phosphorylation were different , peaking or beginning to increase in abundance at early or late time points . 
Similarly , the clusters containing peptides with decreased phosphorylation began to decrease either early or quite late , indicating differences in phosphopeptide profiles across the data set . 
Differences among the Gene Ontology ( GO ) terms enriched in the clustered proteins with increased or decreased phosphorylation were detected . 
Terms for regulation of apoptosis , transmembrane transport , nuclear organization , and cell proliferation were enriched among proteins with increased phosphoryl-ation , whereas terms for cytoskeleton organization , protein complex assembly , and cell polarity were enriched among proteins with decreased phosphorylation ( Fig. 1B ) . 
Overall trends within the nuclear , membrane , and cytosolic fractions were also considered . 
Although the percentages of phosphopeptides with altered phosphorylation were similar ( 22 , 18 , and 20 % ) across each fraction , peptides with decreased phosphorylation were enriched in the membrane and nuclear fractions ( Fig. 1C ) . 
Although quicker dynamics might be expected in the membrane and cytosolic fractions ( due to cascades initiating at the cell periphery at sites of invasion ) , overall rates were similar across each fraction . 
This may be due to the fact that the T3SS-1 pool of effectors is quickly injected into host cells , and several directly target host proteins in the cytosol and nucleus ( 17 , 19 , 27 ) . 
Validation and confirmation of phosphoproteomics data 
To validate the phosphoproteomics data , we confirmed profiles for several phosphorylation sites by immunoblotting . 
Phosphosite-specific antibodies were used to probe phosphorylation dynamics within nuclear , membrane , and cytosolic fractions prepared from cells that were either mock-infected or infected for 2 , 5 , 10 , and 20 min with wild-type S. Typhimurium . 
These profiles compared favorably to those generated by quantitative LC-MS/MS ( Fig. 2A ) . 
The SILAC data were also compared to protein phosphorylation signaling events previously reported in host cells during Salmonella invasion . 
In each case in which a phosphosite within a host target of Salmonella was identified in the LC-MS/MS data , previously reported alterations in phosphorylation were confirmed by the SILAC profiles . 
Phosphorylation of the TxY motif in extracellular signal -- regulated kinase 1 and 2 ( ERK1/2 ) increased 10-fold during Salmonella infection ( Fig. 2 , A and B ) , which is consistent with previous work showing activation of these kinases downstream of SopB and SopE/E2 ( 12 , 28 ) . 
Similarly , increased phosphorylation of threonine pairs 69/71 and 51/53 was observed in the cAMP ( adenosine 3 ′ ,5 ′ - monophosphate ) -- dependent activating transcription factor 2 ( ATF2 ) and ATF7 , which are components of the activator protein 1 ( AP-1 ) complex ( 29 , 30 ) . 
Downstream of SopB , we observed increased phosphorylation of Ser474 from Akt2 , as well as Ser588 of an Akt effector , AS160 ( Fig. 2B ) ( 14 , 31 ) . 
Phosphorylation of Ser181 in PAK4 was also increased , which is downstream of Akt and follows activation of Cdc42 by SopB and SopE/E2 ( 14 , 32 ) . 
Changes in the phosphorylation of Ser260 in RafA were also expected because SptP inhibits signaling through the ERK1/2 pathway ( 15 ) . 
Phosphorylation dynamics after epidermal growth factor treatment compared to Salmonella infection 
Signaling through the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) represents a relatively well-characterized pathway that is initiated by extracellular ligand-receptor binding and that proceeds through an intracellular MAPK cascade to induce transcription of genes encoding factors that promote cell growth and proliferation . 
Conversely , a host cell receptor for Salmonella has not been identified , and induction of signaling cascades has not been detected in epithelial cells as a result of bacteria binding to the cell surface ( 7 ) . 
Instead , the array of effector proteins injected into host cells localizes to various compartments within the host cell , in some cases inducing MAPK signaling for cytokine production or stimulating an innate immune response ( or both ) . 
Given the different spatial modes of action , one might expect that signaling downstream of Salmonella would not necessarily conform to that of canonical cellular signaling pathways . 
Olsen et al. have previously reported global temporal profiles for changes in the phosphorylation of Tyr , Ser , and Thr sites during EGF stimulation ( 26 ) . 
Although a slightly different time course was used and lysates were separated into only nuclear and cytosolic fractions , their data were also collected from HeLa cells , and the experimental design and data set size are similar to those of our study . 
Olsen et al. observed that changes in the phosphorylation of Tyr sites occur earlier than that of Ser or Thr sites during stimulation with EGF ( Fig. 3A ) . 
Treating our data similarly , we observed similar rates for all three sites , indicating that , unlike EGF , Salmonella does not trigger rapid changes in the phosphorylation of Tyr sites in proteins at the cell membrane ( Fig. 3A ) . 
However , the magnitude of changes in the phosphorylation of Tyr sites induced by Salmonella is higher than that for Ser or Thr sites . 
Although we would not necessarily expect a great degree of overlap between phosphorylation sites regulated by Salmonella and EGF , a more detailed comparison of individual sites is illuminating . 
Seventy-two regulated phosphopeptides were common between the two data sets , with only half of them showing vaguely similar patterns of regulation ( Fig. 3B ) . 
Thus , even individual proteins can play different roles in signaling pathways . 
In addition , among peptides with similar profiles ( such as ERK2 ) , changes in phosphorylation were almost always delayed during Salmonella infection compared to EGF stimulation . 
This indicates that stimulation of the various host targets by SPI-1 delivered effectors occurs more slowly than signaling events initiated by receptor activation at the cell membrane . 
We asked whether specific functional classes of proteins are used in a similar way . 
Enriched GO terms for cellular compartment were similar after EGF treatment and Salmonella infection , but terms for biological processes relating to transcriptional regula ¬ 
Salmonella infection A main trigger of innate immune responses is the recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns ( PAMPs ) by Toll-like receptors ( TLRs ) and nucleotide oligomerization domain -- like receptors ( NLRs ) , leading to MAPK signaling and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines . 
These proteins are abundant in professional pha-gocytes , but epithelial cells , which are continually exposed to large numbers of bacteria , down-regulate signaling through these receptors to prevent uncontrolled inflammation ( 33 ) . 
Salmonella actively stimulates innate immune responses in epithelial cells through mechanisms dependent on effector proteins SopE/E2 and SopB , but which do not involve TLRs or NLRs ( 7 ) . 
Salmonella use tetrathionate derived from reactive oxygen species generated during inflammation as an electron acceptor for respiration ( 34 ) . 
This gives them a growth advantage over commensal microbes , and inflammation enhances transmission and growth of Salmonella in the intestinal lumen ( 35 ) . 
Thus , signaling events observed during Salmonella invasion of these cells likely represent active manipulation of host processes by the bacteria , such as cytoskeletal dynamics and immune signaling , both of which are central to pathogenesis and disease . 
Within the wild-type data set , several sites showing changes in phosphorylation likely represent previously unknown host targets of T3SS-1 effectors ( Table 1 ) . 
For example , increased phosphorylation of activating sites in Ras GTPase-activating -- like protein IQGAP1 and PKD3 ( protein serine-threonine kinase D3 ) was observed . 
Because PKC phosphorylates both of these sites , these represent potential signaling targets downstream of the T3SS-1 effector SipA , which promotes PKC activation ( 9 , 20 , 36 , 37 ) . 
IQGAP1 promotes bacterial invasion and activation of Rac1 and Cdc42 during Salmonella infection ( 38 ) . 
Similarly , dynamically phosphorylated sites in the transcriptional regulators histone deacetylase 1 and non -- protein amounts were analyzed from each time point . 
MARCKS , myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate ; CFL1 , cofilin-1 ; PKR2 , cAMP-dependent protein kinase type II-a regulatory subunit ; CDK2 , cyclin-dependent kinase 2 ; ARAF , serine/threonine-protein kinase A-Raf . 
Presumably not all the proteins that show decreased phosphorylation with DsopB infection are actually direct targets of SopB , either through its phosphatase activity or by other means . 
Rather , it is more likely that SopB acts through a small number of kinases or phosphatases to alter the phosphorylation of a wider range of host proteins indirectly . 
To identify kinases that might be regulated downstream of SopB , we first filtered out the phosphopeptides that showed at least a twofold difference between wildtype and DsopB infections and that were significantly different from mock infections . 
Among the 348 phosphopeptides meeting these criteria , one sequence motif , RxRxxS , was significantly enriched , occurring in 15 peptides ( Fig. 5C ) . 
This motif is a consensus recognition phosphorylation site for Akt , RSK , and p70S6K isoforms ( 51 ) , and at least 7 of the 15 peptides are substrates of one or more of these kinases ( Fig. 5C ) ( 51 ) . 
These data suggest that SopB targets Akt and RSK1 ( Fig. 5B ) , which in turn targets the sodium-hydrogen exchanger 1 ( Fig. 5C ) ( 14 , 52 ) . 
SopB can decrease apoptosis through an Akt-dependent mechanism that has not been fully characterized . 
Accordingly , we detected a 2.5-fold increase in phosphorylation of Ser99 in Bcl2 antagonist of cell death ( BAD ) with infection by wild-type bacteria , an increase that is abrogated with DsopB ( Fig. 5D ) . 
Ser99 in BAD is phosphorylated by Akt , resulting in the sequestering of BAD in the cytosol , thereby inactivating its pro-apoptotic activity by preventing its association with prosurvival proteins at mitochondria ( 55 ) . 
Thus , SopB - and Akt-dependent antiapoptotic signaling may be facilitated through BAD inactivation . 
Salmonella effector proteins induce actin rearrangement during the invasion process , which requires the activity of SopB and SopE/E2 on small G proteins [ heterotrimeric guanosine triphosphate ( GTP ) -- binding proteins ] . 
Akt phosphorylation of Rac1 at Ser71 inhibits GTP binding and , thus , Rac1 activity ( 53 ) . 
When active , however , Rac1 can signal through PAK and LIM domain kinase 1 ( LIMK ) to phosphorylate Ser3 of cofilin and thereby inhibit its actin depolymerizing activity ( 58 , 59 ) . 
Infection with wild-type Salmonella induced a 3.5-fold increase in Ser71 phosphorylation of Rac1 and a 2-fold decrease in Ser3 phosphorylation of cofilin ( Fig. 5D ) ( see also the immunoblot in Fig. 2A ) . 
Both of these effects depended on SopB , indicating that SopB can inactivate Rac1 through Akt to promote cofilin activity . 
Recruitment of vesicle-associated membrane protein 8 ( VAMP8 ) -- positive endocytic vesicles to Salmonella-induced membrane ruffles is required for efficient invasion and dependent on the phosphatase activity of SopB ( 60 ) . 
However , although these vesicles likely provide membranes to the forming macropinosome , targets of VAMP8 during infection are currently unknown . 
Syntaxin 7 forms a SNARE ( soluble N-ethylmaleimide -- sensitive factor attachment protein receptor ) complex with VTI1b , syntaxin 8 , and VAMP8 to fuse membranes within the endosomal pathway ( 61 ) , and formation of this complex can be increased by Akt-mediated phosphorylation of syntaxin 7 at Ser126 and Ser129 ( 54 ) . 
Salmonella induced a SopB-dependent , threefold increase in phosphorylation on both Ser126 and Ser129 ( Fig. 5D ) . 
Thus , SopB may promote SNARE complex formation through VAMP8 recruitment , as well as Akt-dependent phosphorylation of syntaxin 7 to regulate vesicle fusion during formation of the Salmonella-containing vacuole . 
DISCUSSION
The mechanism or mechanisms through which Salmonella effector proteins bypass innate immune receptors to exploit host signaling pathways represent an exceptional degree of adaptation by Salmonella to its host . 
Here , we present a global analysis of host phosphorylation events induced during the initial phase of S. Typhimurium challenge of a well-characterized human epithelial cell line , enabling temporal modeling of the infection-induced 
The phosphoproteomics analysis presented here shows how signaling in host cells responds to a bacterial pathogen . 
Low biological variability ( XCV < 15 % ) and rigorous statistical limits mean that the data presented here are a reliable resource for generating new testable hypotheses about the actions of Salmonella . 
Indeed , the combination of these data with refined bioinformatics predictions of kinase substrates led us to identify an unanticipated role for the kinase Pim as a major player in Salmonella-induced host cell signaling . 
Furthermore , by using a DsopB strain to attri-bute specific events to a particular effector , we have established connections between previously orphaned observations of the impact of Salmonella on host cells . 
These data provide a systems-level view of a signaling system other than canonical receptor-mediated cascades , and , given the importance of bacterial-induced inflammation , they are a valuable resource for understanding host-pathogen interactions . 
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture and Salmonella infection
HeLa cells were maintained in Dulbecco 's modified Eagle 's medium ( DMEM ) containing glucose ( 4500 mg/liter ) and 4 mM L-glutamine ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) supplemented with 10 % ( v/v ) qualified fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) ( Invitrogen ) , an additional 2 mM L-glutamine ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , and penicillin and streptomycin ( 0.1 U/liter ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . 
For SILAC labeling , cells were split from normal growth media into arginine - and lysine-free DMEM ( Caisson Laboratories Inc. ) supplemented with 10 % ( v/v ) dialyzed FBS ( Invitrogen ) , penicillin and streptomycin ( 0.1 U/liter ) , and L-lysine ( 36.5 mg/liter ) and L-arginine ( 21 mg/liter ) for light-labeled cells ( Sigma-Aldrich ) , D4-lysine ( 37.5 mg/liter ) and 13C6-arginine ( 21.75 mg/liter ) for medium-labeled cells , and 13C 15 6 6 N2-lysine ( 38.5 mg/liter ) and 13C 15N4-arginine ( 22.25 mg/liter ) for heavy-labeled cells ( Cambridge Isotope Laboratories ) . 
Cells were then maintained in labeling medium for at least six cell divisions , as previously described ( 65 ) . 
Eight 15-cm culture dishes of each SILAC label were seeded , each with 5 × 106 cells , about 40 hours before infection . 
Twenty hours before infection , SILAC DMEM was removed , cells were washed twice with 10 ml of phosphate-buffered saline ( PBS ) , and then 16 ml of serum-free and antibiotic-free SILAC DMEM was added to each plate . 
An overnight Salmonella culture [ wild-type S. Typhimurium SL1344 or S. Typhimurium SL1344 DsopB ( 31 ) ] was subcultured ( 1:33 ) in LB broth for 3 hours . 
The bacterial inoculum was prepared by pelleting bacteria at 10,000 relative centrifugal force ( RCF ) for 2 min at room temperature . 
Bacterial pellets were resuspended in serum-free , antibiotic-free DMEM , and HeLa cells were infected at a multiplicity of infection ( MOI ) of 200 and incubated at 37 °C and 5 % CO2 ( light-labeled cells were mockinfected in medium only ) . 
At the desired infection times , cells were removed from the incubator and immediately placed on ice . 
The medium was removed and plates were washed three times with 10 ml of cold PBS and harvested with a scraper . 
Cells carrying the same SILAC label were pooled , pelleted for 4 min at 600 RCF at 4 °C , and resuspended in 3.2 ml of cold lysis buffer [ 1 mM Na3VO4 , 10 mM NaF , 5 mM Na4P2O7 , 20 mM b-glycerophosphate , 0.5 mM pervanadate , 100 mM deltamethrin , 100 nM calyculin A , and Roche complete protease inhibitor cocktail ( Roche Diagnostics ) in PBS ] . 
Cells were lysed on ice by five or six passages through a 22-gauge needle , and nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation for 4 min at 600 RCF at 4 °C . 
The supernatant was retained , and the pellet ( nuclear fraction ) was resuspended in 1.6 ml of digestion buffer [ 1 % ( w/v ) sodium deoxycholate/50 mM NH4HCO3 ] and immediately heated at 99 °C for 5 min . 
Membranes were pelleted from the supernatant for 30 min at 16,000 RCF at 4 °C and the supernatant was retained . 
The pellet and supernatant from this step were mixed with 800 ml and 1.6 ml of digestion buffer , respectively , and both were heated at 99 °C for 5 min . 
Samples were removed and cooled to room temperature , MgCl2 was added to a final concentration of 1.5 mM , and benzonase ( 2.5 × 10 − 3 U/ml ; Novagen ) was added to cleave DNA and decrease viscosity . 
Protein concentrations were determined for each sample with a standard Bradford assay ( Pierce ) . 
Eight milligrams of protein from each nuclear fraction was combined , 8 mg from each cytosolic fraction was combined , and 2 mg from each membrane fractions was combined . 
Sample generation for phosphoproteomics
Samples were subjected to tryptic digest , desalting , in-solution IEF , and phosphopeptide enrichment conditions as previously described ( 24 ) . 
Mass spectrometry
For LC -- ESI ( electrospray ionization ) MS , samples were analyzed on an LTQ-OrbitrapXL ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) coupled online to an Agilent 1100 Series nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography ( HPLC ) instrument with a nanospray ionization source ( Proxeon Biosystems ) as previously described ( 66 ) . 
LC-MS/MS data analysis and clustering
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant software ( v1 .0.1.13 ) as previously described , except that only N-terminal acetylation and phosphoryl-ation of serine , threonine , and tyrosine residues were selected as variable modifications ( 67 ) . 
Data were searched against a combined database containing both forward and reversed protein sequence to determine false discovery rate , and P values were generated by MaxQuant on the basis of the biological variation between all samples analyzed . 
At this stage , all peptides that showed a statistically significant ( P < 0.01 ) change in at least one time point compared to the uninfected control ( at zero time ) were considered `` regulated '' by Salmonella . 
For global analyses , all identified phosphopeptides with distinct phosphosites or phosphosite probabilities were considered separate peptides . 
In cases where specific peptides are reported , assignments were made to the site ( s ) with the highest probability reported by MaxQuant . 
All identified phosphosites from this study are publicly available at http : / / www.phosphonet.ca , along with analyses of their evolutionary conservation in 20 other species and predictions of the kinases that most likely target these phosphosites . 
FCM clustering was done with the MFuzz toolbox with c ( number of clusters ) and m ( fuzzification parameter ) values of 6 and 2 , respectively , applied after the software normalized all data within each time point to have a mean of 0 and SD of 1 ( 68 ) . 
Clustering for GO analysis was done with the DAVID Functional Annotation Tool ( 69 , 70 ) . 
Common motifs were searched with Motif-X , and default settings were used except that MS/MS was selected as a foreground format , phosphorylated serine was selected as the central character , and International Protein Index Human Proteome was selected as the background data set ( 71 ) . 
Predictions of upstream kinases were performed with the Kinase Predictor algorithm in PhosphoNET ( 72 ) . 
High-throughput Western blotting
Custom Kinetworks KCPS multi-immunoblotting analyses were performed as described previously ( http://www.kinexus.ca ) ( 73 ) with 300 mg of detergent-solubilized HeLa lysates prepared as above . 
The Kinetworks analysis involves resolution of proteins in a single lysate sample by SDS -- polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( SDS-PAGE ) and subsequent immuno-blotting overnight at 4 °C with one to three primary phosphosite-specific antibodies per channel in a 20-lane Immunetics multiblotter . 
Phosphosite antibodies were typically sourced from Invitrogen , Cell Signaling Technologies , and Millipore . 
The antibody mixtures were carefully selected to avoid overlapping cross-reactivity with target proteins . 
The membranes were later rinsed with TBST buffer [ 50 mM tris base , 150 mM NaCl , and 0.5 % ( v/v ) Triton X-100 ( pH 7.4 ) ] and then incubated with the relevant horseradish peroxidase -- conjugated secondary antibodies for 45 min at room temperature . 
The immunoblots were developed with ECL Plus re-agent ( Amersham ) , and signals were captured by a Fluor-S MultiImager and quantified with Quantity One software ( Bio-Rad ) . 
Background was fewer than 100 counts per minute for these analyses . 
IL-8 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Infections for IL-8 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) were carried out in 24-well plates , with HeLa cells seeded at 1 × 105 cells per well the afternoon of the day before infection . 
Three hours before infection , the cells were serum-starved , and serum-free DMEM was used at all subsequent steps of the experiment . 
Inhibitors were added to the cells 30 min before the cells were inoculated with bacteria and prepared as described above , at an MOI of 100 , and the inhibitor treatment was continued for the duration of the infection . 
At 30 min after inoculation , the cells were washed four times with PBS followed by the addition of serumfree DMEM containing gentamicin ( 100 mg/ml ) to kill extracellular bacteria . 
Culture supernatants were collected at 4 hours after inoculation and centrifuged for 2 min at 10,000 RCF to pellet any cellular material , and the supernatant was aliquoted and stored at − 80 °C until IL-8 concentrations were assayed . 
Inhibitors were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ) , and cells treated with DMSO served as the control . 
MK 2206 and SGI 1776 ( Selleck ) were used at 1 and 3 mM , respectively ; PD 98059 and chelerythrine ( EMD Chemicals ) were used at 50 and 2 mM , respectively ; and Pim-1 inhibitor 2 ( Tocris Bioscience ) was used at 100 mM . 
The IL-8 ELISA used to determine the concentration of IL-8 in culture supernatants was supplied in kit form ( BD ) and was performed according to the provided instructions . 
All infections were performed at least three times and assayed independently , and statistical significance was assessed with a one-way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) and a Bonferroni post hoc test . 
Cell viability was assayed according to the manufacturer 's instructions with an In Vitro Toxicology Assay Kit , XTT based ( Sigma ) . 
Cells were treated as described above except that DMEM without phenol red was used and the XTT stock solution was added to cells after the initial 30-min inoculation . 
Culture supernatants were then assayed for cell viability according to the manufacturer 's instructions . 
For siRNA treatment , HeLa cells were seeded at 2.5 × 104 cells per well in 24-well plates the afternoon before transfection of the siRNA pools . 
Cells were transfected with 300 ng per well of control nontargeting siRNA pool ( D-001810-10-05 ) or pools targeting Pim-1 ( L-003923-00-0005 ) , Pim-2 ( L-005359-00-0005 ) , or Pim-3 ( L-032287-00-0005 ) with Dharmafect1 according to the manufacturer 's instructions ( Dharmacon ) . 
The medium was changed 24 hours after transfection . 
At 48 hours after transfection , cells were infected with S. Typhimurium for 4 hours , and IL-8 concentration in cell culture supernatants was assayed by ELISA as described above . 
Remaining cells were washed three times with PBS and lysed in 1 × SDS sample buffer for subsequent immunoblotting with antibodies against Pim-2 ( HPA000285 , Sigma ) and Pim-3 ( AP7171a , Abjent ) . 
Submitted 8 November 2010 Accepted 1 September 2011
Final Publication 20 September 2011 10.1126 / scisignal .2001668 Citation : L. D. Rogers , N. F. Brown , Y. Fang , S. Pelech , L. J. Foster , Phosphoproteomic analysis of Salmonella-infected cells identifies key kinase regulators and SopB-dependent host phosphorylation events . 
Sci . 
Signal . 
4 , rs9 ( 2011 ) . 
REFERENCES