View Article Online / Journal Homepage / Table of Contents for this issue Dynamic Article Links 
Published on 26 September 2011 . 
Downloaded by FAC DE QUIMICA on 10/22/2018 3:40:38 PM 
Metallomics
Cite this : Metallomics , 2011 , 3 , 1130 -- 1134 
MINIREVIEW 
www.rsc.org/metallomics 
Cobalt stress in Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica : molecular bases for toxicity and resistancew 
F. Barras * and M. Fontecave ab cdef 
Received 15th July 2011 , Accepted 6th September 2011 DOI : 10.1039 / c1mt00099c 
Cobalt ( Co ) is present in trace amounts in the environment but it can be toxic when it accumulates in cells . 
The question of how Co produces its toxic effects and how living organisms 
protect themselves from , and resist to , such a stress remains to be clariﬁed . 
Studies pertaining to these issues were recently carried out in Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica . 
Iron -- sulfur 
proteins were identiﬁed as primary targets of Co ions . 
Perturbation of iron homeostasis , oxidative stress and possible effects on sulfur assimilation were noticed . 
Cells were found to respond by up-regulating genes involved in the biosynthesis of Fe -- S clusters as well as genes involved in Co eﬄux . 
These data are summarized in this review article to provide a preliminary general view of Co toxicity mechanisms in these two bacterial models . 
Introduction
Co occurs naturally in many different chemical forms , mostly in the Co ( II ) and Co ( III ) redox states . 
It is present in soils , surface and underground water . 
It is released from volcanic eruptions , burning coal and oil , car and airplane exhaust and from a variety of industrial processes . 
Co serves as an essential 1 enzyme cofactor in most living organisms , bacteria , plants and animals . 
In particular , Co is needed as a component of vitamin 2 B12 that is required , for example in humans , for the catalytic activity of methionine synthase and methylmalonyl-CoA mutase , as well as for a variety of other cobalamins . 
3 4 The toxicity of Co is quite limited as compared to that of many other heavy metals . 
However , exposure to Co can cause health effects , in particular targeting the respiratory tract ( asthma , pneumonia , lung cancer ... ) , the skin ( contact dermatitis ) or the thyroid gland . 
However still very little is 5 known regarding the mechanisms of Co toxicity , the nature of the principal cellular targets within cells and the strategies used for resistance . 
Several properties of Co have been put forward to account for its toxicity . 
Its known chemical afinity for sulfur atoms is invoked as a possible negative effect on a number of proteins critically depending on thiol/cysteine groups . 
Its redox properties might allow it to catalyse 
Laboratoire de Chimie Bactérienne , Institut de Microbiologie de la Méditerranée , CNRS , 31 chemin Joseph Aiguier , 13009 Marseille , France . 
E-mail : barras@ifr88.cnrs-mrs.fr; Tel : +33 4 91 16 45 79 b Aix-Marseille Université , Marseille , France c CEA , iRTSV/LCBM , 38054 Grenoble , France d CNRS , UMR 5249 , 38054 Grenoble , France e Université Joseph Fourier , 38054 Grenoble , France f Collège de France , 11 Place Marcelin Berthelot , 75231 Paris Cedex 05 , France w This article is published as part of a themed issue on Metal Toxicity , Guest Edited by Gregor Grass and Christopher Rensing . 
production of reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) resulting in an oxidative stress . 
Because of its metallic ion nature , it might interfere with the homeostasis of other essential metals ( Ni , Fe , ... ) . 
Whether these different potentially detri-2 + 2 + mental effects arise in vivo remains to be demonstrated . 
Some interesting results have been recently obtained , mainly using simple bacterial models , such as Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica , clearly pointing to an effect of Co on the activity of iron -- sulfur ( Fe -- S ) enzymes and on the expression of the complex cellular process of Fe -- S cluster assembly . 
Fe -- S clusters are inorganic cofactors absolutely required in a number of important biological processes such as respiration , photosynthesis , tRNA modiﬁcation , DNA repair , genetic regulation . 
Assembly of these clusters in proteins is assisted 6 by complex protein machineries , which are highly conserved throughout all living organisms . 
These machineries serve to 6,7 mobilize sulfur ( from cysteine ) and iron atoms , which eventually form a Fe -- S cluster on a so-called scaffold protein . 
Once formed , the cluster is then transferred , via carrier proteins , to target apo-proteins . 
In this review article , focusing exclusively on E. coli and S. enterica , emerging chemical and cellular aspects of Co toxicity , in particular through its effects on Fe -- S cluster homeostasis , are discussed . 
a 
The concentration issue
As a nutrient , Co is required in the 1 -- 10 nM concentration 8 range . 
In contrast , E. coli growth was found to be totally blocked by Co at concentration 4 1 mM while concentrations in the range of 100 -- 500 mM were without visible effects .9,10 
However , these ﬁgures can vary as a function of growth conditions . 
For instance , 160 mM Co was enough to prevent growth of S. enterica in minimal glucose medium . 
9 
Interestingly , inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry ( ICP-MS ) analysis detected 100 nM Co in LB , but the actual concentration of Co bioavailable was proposed to be less than 2 nM . 
It was proposed that components such as yeast 8,11 extract or tryptone present in LB are likely to chelate Co , thereby reducing the concentration to which cells are actually exposed . 
Hence , bioavailability is a key parameter that 8 should be carefully considered when analysing interaction 
between bacteria and Co present in their surrounding . 
Molecular bases for cobalt toxicity
Fig. 1 The poisoning model . 
In the presence of Co , the scaffold and carrier proteins of the ISC/SUF machineries ( drawn as rectangle ) can exist in four forms , two of which containing Co and delivering Co to target proteins ( drawn as circles ) , thus competing with the Fe,S-containing form , which serves to maturate the target . 
In addition 
1. Co and Fe–S enzymes
Fe -- S proteins were identiﬁed as being major targets of Co ions within cells . 
This is in agreement with the well-known intrinsic thiophilicity of Co ions . 
The following experimental observations support this conclusion . 
Upon exposure of bacterial cells to Co , various Fe -- S enzyme activities have been shown to signiﬁcantly decrease ( 50 -- 80 % loss ) with no indication of loss 9,12 of protein stability . 
This is the case for TCA cycle enzymes aconitase B and succinate dehydrogenase , tRNA-modifying methyl-thio-transferase MiaB , sulﬁte and nitrite reductases CysI and NirB , and FhuH , an enzyme involved in ferri-siderophore reduction . 
In fact , CysI and NirB contain two different iron-based cofactors , one 4Fe -- 4S cluster and one sirohaem , and it is likely that not only the cluster , but also the sirohaem , is affected by the Co challenge . 
Co inhibition of CysI and NirB was fully reversed by adding 1 mM iron in the medium , but an ineficient protection of CysI and NirB by anaerobiosis was observed pointing to sirohaem as a critical target of Co since low oxygen tension is generally protective with regard to Fe -- S enzymes inactivation . 
On the other hand it is unlikely that Co 9 simply replaces Fe in the centre of the macrocycle and hence 
the mechanism of sirohaem inactivation remains unknown . 
2. A competition between iron and Co
As a consequence of the extensive inhibition of enzyme activities , bacterial growth in media containing Co is dramatically impaired . 
However , growth can be restored simply 9,10,12,13 by adding iron salts in the culture medium , suggesting that Co competes out iron at biological sites . 
An example of such a competition is provided by studies of the iron sensing regulatory protein Fur . 
It has been shown , under in vitro conditions , that the site used to bind regulatory Fe ion may be occupied by 2 + Co cations . 
Moreover , the actual presence of Co within active 14 sites of Fe -- S proteins was demonstrated in the case of FhuF . 
12 Metal analysis and spectroscopy of FhuF puriﬁed from cells treated with Co salts revealed incomplete cluster formation and contamination with Co. . 
As an additional observation supporting the notion that Co toxicity originates from its ability to replace iron out of active sites of important cellular enzymes , a bacterial strain lacking an active fur iron-sensing system , which yields to massive iron import , proves to be more resistant to Co than a wild-type strain . 
9,13,15 
3. Co and Fe–S assembly
Direct reaction of Co with holo-forms of Fe -- S proteins such as aconitase , MiaB and FhuF did not result in the degradation incorporation of Co is facilitated by the action of an oxidative stress ( ROS : reactive oxygen species ) . 
of the cluster through substitution with Co , thus indicating that once assembled in the proper protein , clusters are kinetically stable enough to resist high concentrations of Co. . 
This ﬁnding raised the possibility that introduction of 12 
Co , into those proteins was mediated by the Fe -- S cluster assembly machineries . 
First , in agreement with the known lability of its cluster , it was shown that the scaffold protein , IscU , in the holo-form , can lose its iron content and incorporate Co during in vitro incubation with Co salts . 
Furthermore , these Co-containing forms of IscU had the capacity to transfer mixed ( Co , Fe ) -- S clusters to apo-targets in vitro . 
Studied 12 targets included ferredoxin and MiaB , which bind 2Fe -- 2S and 
4Fe -- 4S clusters , respectively . 
Similarly SufA , a carrier protein , was shown to be able to provide a ( Co , Fe ) -- S cluster to apoproteins in vitro . 
Second , apo-forms of IscU and SufA , for example , have a signiﬁcant afinity for Co in agreement with the fact that cysteines are providing the metal ligands . 
At elevated concentrations , Co might preferentially bind to that metal binding site . 
Thus , the currently accepted mechanism for the incorporation of Co into Fe -- S enzymes relies on the 
`` metal transferase '' activity of some of the components , scaffolds and carriers , belonging to Fe -- S biogenesis machi-neries . 
Importantly , oxidative stress conditions , which result in destabilised clusters , facilitate the substitution of Co for Fe . 
This was shown by using aconitase as a test enzyme in vitro . 
12 Fig. 1 summarizes the connections between the different forms of ISC/SUF proteins and the target Fe -- S enzymes as well as the interference of oxidative stress , explaining how Co might impact a large array of critical Fe -- S activities . 
It is important to note that the structure and the reactivity of the ( Co -- Fe ) -- S cluster of Fig. 1 are still incompletely characterized . 
4. Co and oxidative stress
Co is well known to generate ROS . 
This is linked to its 16 ability to enjoy different redox states , mainly Co ( II ) and Co ( III ) , but also under certain circumstances Co ( I ) . 
The reduced states have low redox potentials allowing them to react in vitro with O2 and H2O2 , through Fenton-type reactions , to generate ROS , superoxide and hydroxyl radicals , as shown from DNA cleavage assays and spin-trapping experiments . 
Some observations have led to the preliminary 17 conclusion that indeed cells exposed to Co suffer from oxidative stress . 
In particular , aconitase activity in cells grown under anoxic conditions was found to be more resistant to Co than in aerobically grown cells . 
In addition , by using a speciﬁc 9,12 oxidative-stress-sensitive ﬂuorescent probe , a 2.3-fold increase in the levels of ROS was observed in cells grown in the presence of Co. . 
Last , evidence was obtained for Co-induced 15 production of H2O2 in vivo , as the H2O2-sensing OxyR activator was turned on upon Co exposure ( see below ) . 
On the 15 other hand , very few , if any , oxidative stress genes were found to be up-regulated by Co ( see below ) . 
Thus , the question of whether Co induces ROS production should be considered as an open issue . 
In particular , the fact that Co was shown to catalyse Fenton reaction in vitro should be considered with caution , as the concentration of Co in the cells might never reach a level suficiently high to do so in vivo . 
Hence , although evidence linking Co and oxidative stress is available , importance of the contribution of the latter in Co toxicity remains to be rigorously assessed . 
5. Co and sulfur assimilation
Circumstantial evidence was reported which could link Co toxicity and sulfur assimilation . 
Most compelling was the fact 9 that supplementing culture media with sulfur sources seem to help S. enterica to grow better in the presence of Co. . 
Sulfur sources exhibited different abilities to facilitate growth in the presence of Co , in the following order : sulfate o sulﬁte o sulﬁde o cysteine . 
Interestingly , this order mirrors the sulfur assimilation pathway , going from sulfate to increasingly reduced forms up to cysteine . 
These data are consistent with the idea that Co decreases sulfur assimilation eficiency , through unknown mechanisms , and that this leads to shortage in cysteine synthesis and growth inhibition in minimal medium . 
A decrease in intracellular cysteine concentration could both alter Fe -- S cluster biogenesis as cysteine is the source of sulfur used by the Fe -- S biogenesis machineries , and diminish the level of the glutathione pool , a potent antioxidant molecule , another potential threat for Fe -- S centres . 
Further 9 work is necessary to demonstrate the effect of Co on sulfur shortage and to determine how this contributes to Co toxicity . 
Cellular resistance to Co exposure
1. Transcriptomic analysis of E. coli response to Co
Important information regarding how E. coli resists to Co potential toxicity ( used at 250 mM for 30 min ) was provided by transcriptomic analysis . 
An unexpected feature was the 15 limited number of genes whose expression was modiﬁed following exposure to Co. . 
As expected , rcnA , which encodes a Co eﬄux system , ranked among the most induced genes ( see below ) . 
Not surprisingly either , the set of induced genes included iscRSUA , hscA , sufABCDSE and nfuA . 
All of these encode factors involved in Fe -- S biogenesis . 
The ISC machinery is thought to promote Fe -- S biogenesis under normal growth conditions , conﬁrming that Co leads to unbalanced Fe -- S homeostasis . 
The SUF machinery promotes Fe -- S biogenesis 18 under conditions unfavourable to this process such as iron limitation and oxidative stress . 
Similarly the nfuA gene 18 encodes a Fe -- S carrier that is required under stress conditions . 
Co-induced synthesis of all these Fe -- S assembly 6 cofactors is consistent with Fe -- S clusters being major targets of Co toxicity . 
Another interesting resistance mechanism relies on modiﬁcation of the control of metal uptake as suggested by the down-regulation of a number of transport systems . 
This is the case of feoB , which is thought to facilitate Fe import . 
2 + 19 Even though the role of FeoB in Co uptake has not been demonstrated , it is tempting to think of the cell being weakened by the ability of FeoB to facilitate Co transport and , therefore , limiting FeoB activity . 
Similarly , the nickel uptake system , NikABCDE , is down regulated and one can speculate that Co could use this entry . 
This can be 20,21 rationalized in terms of Co replacing Ni in metal binding 2 + sites thus activating NikR repressor . 
These effects of Co reﬂect the similarity of the coordination chemical properties of these different divalent metal ions , which explain why Co is so eficient at displacing Fe or Ni . 
Syntheses of other 2 + 2 + potential import systems , such as ZupT and CorA , were not modiﬁed ( Fig. 2 ) . 
Interestingly , the expression of very few Fur-regulated genes was found to be induced by Co. . 
A possibility is that Co , by 2 + substituting for Fe at the metal binding site of Fur , misleads 22 the cells , which react as being in iron excess conditions . 
Another possibility is that by disrupting Fe -- S clusters , Co induces an increase in the intracellular concentration of the Fur-sensitive free iron pool . 
Regardless of the explanation , these results appear at odds with previous studies , which established that cells exposed to Co contain less iron and reported up-regulation of Fur-controlled entB and fhuF also directly destabilize particularly labile Fe -- S clusters such as those present on Fe -- S scaffolds . 
RcnAB acts as an eﬄux pump ( see text ) . 
genes . 
Presumably , discrepancies with the transcriptomic 9,12 analysis related to the facts that different concentrations of Co were used , as well as different times of treatment . 
9,12,15 In an attempt to get a grasp on how signals coming from Fe -- S limitation , Fe shortage and oxidative stress , were getting integrated by the cell , Co induction of the suf operon , was kinetically monitored . 
Indeed , this operon is controlled by 15 IscR , Fur and OxyR , which are the Fe -- S homeostasis - , the iron - and the H2O2-sensing regulators , respectively . 
The conclusion was that all three regulators mediate Co induction , however clearly with different time-responses as IscR - , followed by Fur - , and OxyR-mediated responses occurred in this order . 
This supported the view of a primary and key role for IscR , reﬂecting an imbalance in Fe -- S homeostasis ( see below ) . 
This also ﬁts the idea of oxidative stress being a late event , possibly caused by an increase in the intracellular concentration of both Co and free Fe ions . 
2 + 
Fig. 2 Schematic view of an E. coli strain exposed to Co. . 
E. coli lacks a speciﬁc Co importer but Co can enter via the Mg ( II ) transporter CorA , the Zn transporter ZupT , and possibly the Nik and 30,31 2 + 32,33 FeoB importers ( see text ) . 
Note that S. enterica synthesizes an additional system , Cbi , which was found to transport Co and , to a lesser extent , Ni . 
Co displacement of Fe in Fe-protein might lead to the 21 inactivation of some of them . 
The freed iron could yield ROS that would facilitate Co-mediated destabilization of Fe -- S centers . 
Co could 
2. Genetic determinants for resistance to Co
The importance of Fe -- S biogenesis machineries in offering protection against Co toxicity was further demonstrated by the observation that isc , suf and nfuA mutations conferred increased sensitivity to Co. . 
The nfuA mutation was the 12,15 most detrimental in agreement with the view that it is a stressresponding Fe -- S biogenesis factor . 
The sufS and sufE 6,18 mutants were almost as sensitive as nfuA . 
This might be related to the fact that SufSE belongs to the SUF stress adapted biogenesis system , but might also point to some deleterious consequences in the production of sulfurated metabolites or compounds ( see above ) . 
Interestingly , an iscR mutant also exhibited hypersensitivity to Co salts . 
IscR is a 
Fe -- S binding protein , synthesized from the proximal iscR gene 6,23 in the isc operon . 
The holo-form acts as a repressor of the isc operon expression whereas the apo-form acts as an activator of the suf operon . 
Thus , lack of iscR will lead both to constitutive synthesis of the ISC system and failure to activate expression of the suf operon . 
Apparently , increased synthesis of the ISC system does not compensate for the reduced synthesis of the SUF system , as shown by the hypersensitivity of an iscR mutant . 
In the transcriptomic analysis , IscR was found to be crucial in informing the cells of the presence of Co as several of the Co up-regulated genes were no longer induced 15 in the absence of iscR . 
Collectively , these phenotypic analyses reinforce the view of Fe -- S centres as being primary targets of Co toxicity . 
In this vein , it is illuminating that nfuA and sufSE mutations yielded a level of sensitivity of the same magnitude as that caused by the inactivation of RcnA , the 
Co-eﬄux system (see below).
3. The RcnRAB eﬄux system
The rcnRAB genes constitute a genetic cluster controlling both Co and nickel eﬄux . 
RcnR belongs to the recently 13,24,25 described structural family of transcriptional regulators , which is involved in Cu ( CsoR ) , Ni/Co ( RcnR ) , sulfur ( CstR ) homeo-stasis and possibly oxidative stress . 
The rcnA gene 26,27 encodes an eﬄux pump , which appears to function in conjunction with the rcnB gene product , a periplasmic protein , the precise role of which remains unclear . 
The rcnAB genes 28 are organised as a transcription unit and the RcnR regulator represses both transcription of the rcnAB operon and its own . 
Hence , when concentration increases , Co binds to RcnR , alleviating its repressing effect and allowing for enhanced RcnAB-mediated eﬄux . 
Mechanistically , the repression 25,26,29 exhibits some rare features such as ( i ) the two rcnR and rcnAB promoters are convergent and deﬁne a region containing two symmetrically located RcnR DNA binding boxes , ( ii ) RcnR interacts with quite an unusual long region of DNA ( approx . 
160 nucleotides ) , which wraps around it . 
Whether these properties meet with constraints speciﬁc to metal-sensing and cognate gene regulation is as yet unknown . 
4. Metabolic adaptation to the presence of Co
Transcriptomic analysis , summarized above , suggested that Co induces a metabolic adaptation . 
In particular , those pathways relying on Fe -- S enzymes appear to be avoided , as one could expect given the effect of Co on Fe -- S enzymes . 
Consistently , a separate study clearly showed that Co inhibits the aerobic electron transport system and thus respiration . 
10 An overall metabolic change was also indicated by a mass spectrometry-based analysis of metabolites present in spent 
Co-added growth medium vs. iron-added growth medium , showing that in the presence of glucose , oxygen and Co , E. coli adopts a modiﬁed mixed acid fermentation metabolism . 
In particular , the pattern of the metabolites found was fully consistent with the hypothesis of Fe -- S enzymes aconitase , succinate dehydrogenase and fumarate reductases being inactivated by Co exposure . 
Conclusion
Owing to both toxic events associated to Co exposure and the chemical relatedness of Co to other biologically important metals , such as Ni , Fe or Mg , several recent studies , mainly in E. coli and S. enterica as models , have investigated the biology of Co. . 
On the other hand the available information is still very limited , and at the present stage , it is impossible to rationalize this information into a detailed molecular mechanism . 
This is due to the fact that : ( i ) in vitro experiments have not established the kinetic and thermodynamic parameters which allow quantiﬁcation of afinities and binding rates regarding the interaction of proteins with Co and comparison to Fe or other metal ions ; ( ii ) in vivo genetic experiments not only are inhomogeneous in terms of growth media as well as Co concentrations and exposure times , but also do not allow differentiating direct and indirect effects . 
Nevertheless the available results summarized here paint a situation wherein the presence of Co yields , directly or not , a series of intertwined effects . 
Most of these effects -- competing out iron , inducing oxidative stress and possibly affecting sulfur supply -- all converge towards , and culminate into a general dysfunctioning of Fe -- S enzymes . 
Conversely , as some of these latter effects are involved in sulfur supply and ROS resistance , their dysfunctioning enhance the Co deleterious effect . 
Future studies will have to sort out causes and consequences in this self-sustained cycle ( Fig. 2 ) . 
The Fe -- S centered model summarized in this short account stems from the study of bacterial models , E. coli and S. enterica . 
It will be necessary to evaluate its overall signiﬁcance in Co toxicology by comparing it with models derived from studies of other prokaryotic and eukaryotic models . 
Acknowledgements
Thanks are due to members of both of our groups for discussion . 
Thanks are due to Emmanuelle Bouveret for help with the manuscript , and to anonymous referees for comments and suggestions . 
This work was supported by grants from the 
CNRS , the ANR ( Blanc SPV05511 ) , the CEA , the Université de la Méditerranée , and the Université Joseph Fourier . 
References 
1 J. Gál , A. Hursthouse , P. Tatner , F. Stewart and R. Welton , Environ . 
Int. , 2008 , 34 , 821 -- 838 . 
2 A. Cvetkovic , A. L. Menon , M. P. Thorgersen , J. W. Scott , F. L. Poole 2nd , F. E. Jenney Jr , W. A. Lancaster , J. L. Praissman , S. Shanmukh , B. J. Vaccaro , S. A. Trauger , E. Kalisiak , J. V. Apon , G. Siuzdak , S. M. Yannone , J. A. Tainer and M. W. Adams , Nature , 2010 , 466 , 779 -- 782 . 
3 M. Koutmos , S. Datta , K. A. Pattridge , J. L. Smith and R. G. Matthews , Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
U. S. A. , 2009 , 106 , 18527 -- 18532 . 
4 K. Gruber , B. Puffer and B. Kräutler , Chem . 
Soc . 
Rev. , 2011 , 40 , 4346 -- 4363 . 
5 S. Catalani , M. C. Rizzetti , A. Padovani and P. Apostoli , Hum . 
Exp . 
Toxicol. , 2011 in press . 
6 B. Py and F. Barras , Nat . 
Rev. Microbiol. , 2010 , 8 , 436 -- 446 . 
7 M. Fontecave and S. Ollagnier-de Choudens , Arch . 
Biochem . 
Biophys. , 2008 , 474 , 226 -- 237 . 
8 J. Cheng , B. Poduska , R. A. Morton and T. M. Finan , J. Bacteriol. , 2011 , 193 , 4405 -- 4416 . 
9 M. P. Thorgersen and D. M. Downs , J. Bacteriol. , 2007 , 189 , 7774 -- 7781 . 
10 T. Majtan , F. E. Frerman and J. P. Kraus , BioMetals , 2011 , 24 , 335 -- 347 . 
11 C. E. Outten and T. V. O'Halloran , Science , 2001 , 301 , 2488 -- 2492 . 
12 C. Ranquet , S. Ollagnier-de Choudens , L. Loiseau , F. Barras and M. Fontecave , J. Biol . 
Chem. , 2007 , 282 , 30442 -- 30451 . 
13 D. Koch , D. H. Nies and G. Grass , BioMetals , 2007 , 20 , 759 -- 771 . 
14 A. Adrait , L. Jacquamet , L. Le Pape , A. Gonzalez de Peredo , D. Aberdam , J. L. Hazemann , J. M. Latour and I. Michaud-Soret , Biochemistry , 1999 , 38 , 6248 -- 6260 . 
15 J. R. Fantino , B. Py , M. Fontecave and F. Barras , Environ . 
Microbiol. , 2010 , 12 , 2846 -- 2857 . 
16 S. Leonard , P. M. Gannett , Y. Rojanasakul , D. Schwegler-Berry , V. Castranova , V. Vallyathan and X. Shi , J. Inorg . 
Biochem. , 1998 , 70 , 239 -- 244 . 
17 K. Jomova and M. Valko , Toxicology , 2011 , 283 , 65 -- 87 . 
18 B. Py , P. L. Moreau and F. Barras , Curr . 
Opin . 
Microbiol. , 2011 , 14 , 218 -- 223 . 
19 M. L. Cartron , S. Maddocks , P. Gillingham , C. J. Craven and S. C. Andrews , BioMetals , 2006 , 19 , 143 -- 157 . 
20 K. de Pina , C. Navarro , L. McWalter , D. H. Boxer , N. C. Price , S. M. Kelly , M. A. Mandrand-Berthelot and L. F. Wu , Eur . 
J. Biochem. , 1995 , 227 , 857 -- 865 . 
21 D. A. Rodionov , P. Hebbeln , M. S. Gelfand and T. Eitinger , J. Bacteriol. , 2006 , 188 , 317 -- 327 . 
22 S. A. Mills and M. A. Marletta , Biochemistry , 2005 , 44 , 13553 -- 13559 . 
23 J. L. Giel , D. Rodionov , M. Liu , F. R. Blattner and P. J. Kiley , Mol . 
Microbiol. , 2006 , 60 , 1058 -- 1075 . 
24 A. Rodrigue , G. Effantin and M.-A . 
Mandrand-Berthelot , J. Bacteriol. , 2005 , 187 , 2912 -- 2916 . 
25 J. S. Iwig , J. L. Rowe and P. T. Chivers , Mol . 
Microbiol. , 2006 , 62 , 252 -- 262 . 
26 J. S. Iwig and P. T. Chivers , J. Mol . 
Biol. , 2009 , 393 , 514 -- 526 . 
27 N. Grossoehme , T. E. Kehl-Fi , Z. Ma , K. W. Adams , D. M. Cowart , R. A. Scott , E. P. Skaar and D. P. Giedroc , J. Biol . 
Chem. , 2011 , 286 , 13522 -- 13531 . 
28 C. Blériot , G. Effantin , F. Lagarde , M.-A . 
Mandrand-Berthelot and A. Rodrigue , J. Bacteriol. , 2011 , 193 , 3785 -- 3793 . 
29 D. Blaha , S. Arous , C. Blériot , C. Dorel , M.-A . 
MandrandBerthelot and A. Rodrigue , Biochimie , 2011 , 93 , 434 -- 439 . 
30 D. Niegowski and S. Eshaghi , Cell . 
Mol . 
Life Sci. , 2007 , 64 , 2564 -- 2574 . 
31 M. E. Maquire , Curr . 
Opin . 
Struct . 
Biol. , 2006 , 16 , 432 -- 438 . 
32 G. Grass , S. Franke , N. Taudte , D. H. Nies , L. M. Kucharski , M. E. Maguire and C. Rensing , J. Bacteriol. , 2005 , 187 , 1604 -- 1611 . 
33 N. Taudte and G. Grass , BioMetals , 2010 , 23 , 643 -- 656 .