Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect 
International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents 
journal homepage : http://www.elsevier.com/locate/ijantimicag 
Genetic response of Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis to thioridazine rendering the organism resistant to the agent
Gabriella Spengler a , b , c , Liliana Rodrigues a , b , Ana Martins a , b ,1 d Pedro Cerca a , b , Lisa a , b Miguel Viveiros a , g , Séamus Fanning d , g , Joseph c , g , Marta Martins , Matthew M Machado , Soﬁa Santos Costa a , b , Eleni Ntokou e , Isabel Couto a , f , Molnar , Leonard Amaral a , b , g , ∗ 
cCusker d , 
a Grupo de Micobactérias , Unidade de Microbiologia Médica , Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical ( IHMT ) , Universidade Nova de Lisboa , Rua da Junqueira 100 , 1349-008 Lisbon , Portugal b UPMM ( Unidade de Parasitologia e Microbiologia Médicas ) , Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical ( IHMT ) , Universidade Nova de Lisboa , Rua da Junqueira 100 , 1349-008 Lisbon , Portugal c Institute of Medical Microbiology and Immunobiology , Faculty of Medicine , University of Szeged , Szeged , Hungary d UCD Centre for Food Safety , School of Agriculture , Food Science and Veterinary Medicine , University College Dublin , Ireland e Department of Microbiology , Medical School , University of Thessaly , Larissa , Greece f Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos ( CREM ) , Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia ( FCT ) , Universidade Nova de Lisboa , Portugal g Cost Action BM0701 ( ATENS ) , of the European Commission/European Science Foundation , Brussels , Belgium 
a r t i c l e 
a b s t r a c t 
i n f o 
Thioridazine ( TZ ) - induced accumulation of the universal efﬂux pump substrate ethidium bromide and its subsequent efﬂux by Salmonella strains with various degrees of overexpressed efﬂux pumps takes place automatically at pH 7.4 , is independent of a metabolic source , is not affected by a proton ionophore and is precluded by palmitic acid . 
Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis cultured in medium containing increasing concentrations of TZ does not grow during the ﬁrst 6 -- 8 h , after which time its growth is similar to unexposed controls . 
At the end of a 16-h exposure period , the organism is resistant to > 250 mg/L TZ . 
Parallel assessment by real-time reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction ( RT-qPCR ) of the activity of genes that regulate and code for the AcrB transporter of the main efﬂux pump ( AcrAB ) of the organism at periodic intervals suggests a sequence of activation beginning with the stress gene soxS , followed by the global regulator ramA , then by the local regulator marA and then by the transporter acrB . 
These activations take place during the period of no growth . 
By the end of a 16-h culture period , only the acrB transporter gene is still highly overexpressed . 
Assessment of the activity of genes of the two-component regulon PmrA/B indicates that TZ also activates this regulon . 
Because activation of pmrA/B also activates acrB , development of high resistance to TZ during a 16-h culture period is in part due to activation of the two-component regulon . 
© 2011 Elsevier B.V. and the International Society of Chemotherapy . 
All rights reserved . 
Article history : 
Received 8 July 2011 Accepted 24 August 2011 
Keywords : 
Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis Thioridazine AcrAB efﬂux pump Real-time RT-PCR Activation of genes by thioridazine ramA marA soxS rob acrB pmrA pmrB Developed resistance to thioridazine during culture 
1. Introduction
( CDC ) , ` During 1993 -- 1997 , a total of 2,751 outbreaks of foodborne disease were reported ( 489 in 1993 , 653 in 1994 , 628 in 1995 , 477 in 1996 , and 504 in 1997 ) . 
Among outbreaks for which the etiology was determined , bacterial pathogens caused the largest percentage of outbreaks ( 75 % ) and the largest percentage of cases ( 86 % ) . 
Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis According to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention accounted for the largest number of outbreaks , cases , and deaths . ' 
[ 1 ] ; 95 % of Salmonella outbreaks were from food-borne sources [ 2 ] . 
Nosocomial Salmonella infections and outbreaks in hospitals result from food-borne sources , most of which can be traced to food workers ( faecal-to-hand contamination ) with the remainder due to transfer from patient sources ( faecal soiling of bed sheets , etc. ) to hospital personnel who transfer the organism to other patients , etc. [ 3 ] . 
Although hospital-acquired Salmonella infections are readily managed , when they take place in patients who have had a resection of the colon , the organism may penetrate into the mucosa of the colon and produce high mortality rates regardless of therapy [ 4 ] . 
The main reason for problematic therapy lies in the variety of responses that Salmonella activates when in a noxious environment , rendering the organism quite resistant to most antibiotics . 
component regulon , which is activated by the low pH of the phagolysosome of the neutrophil that temporarily imprisons the organism subsequent to its phagocytosis [ 5 ] . 
Activation of the PmrA/B two-step regulon eventually leads to the synthesis of lipid A , which is rapidly introduced into the nascent lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) layer of the outer cell membrane [ 5 ] . 
The increase in LPS makes the organism resistant to practically everything , including most antibiotics and antimicrobial agents such as bactericidins [ 5 ] . 
Failure of antibiotic therapy is also assured by the two-step regulon that activates PmrD , which in turn activates the global regulator of efﬂux pumps , the MarA operon , that eventually leads to the activation of acrB , the gene coding for the transporter component of the main efﬂux pump ( AcrAB ) of the organism [ 5 ] . 
Activation of acrB leads to overexpression of the AcrAB efﬂux pump , bestowing the organism with a multidrug-resistant ( MDR ) phenotype [ 6 ] . 
Intrinsic resistance of Salmonella during colonisation of the colon lies in its downregulation of porins , thereby limiting the penetration of hydrophobic antibiotics , or upregulation of its main AcrAB efﬂux pump that extrudes the antibiotic before it reaches its intended target [ 7,8 ] . 
colon as well as its induced resistance to degradation by the lysosomal machinery of the neutrophil thereby limiting the effectiveness of current antibiotics , coupled with its high frequency in food-borne and nosocomial infections , poses a public health hazard that extols high economic costs and human suffering . 
Salmonella clinical isolates has been scantly reported , it is anticipated that , as is the case for other Gram-negative bacteria , the frequency of multidrug resistance attributed to overexpressed efﬂux pumps will increase as attention to this cause of resistance increases . 
Because of the role that overexpressed efﬂux pumps play in problematic therapy , we have studied the mechanisms by which efﬂux pumps of Gram-negative bacteria arise [ 9,10 ] and have paid particular attention to agents that inhibit their activity [ 7,9 -- 11 ] . 
In addition , we have developed methods for the assessment of efﬂux pumps of bacteria and evaluation of agents that inhibit them [ 12,13 ] . 
Amongst the most potent inhibitors of Gramnegative efﬂux pumps are phenothiazines [ 14,15 ] , amongst which is the neuroleptic phenothiazine thioridazine ( TZ ) . 
In the current study , the effect of TZ on the activity of the efﬂux pump system of S. Enteritidis strains , each one differing from their parental strain with respect to the level of efﬂux pumps expressed , was studied . 
Evaluation of real-time activity was conducted by the automated ethidium bromide ( EtBr ) method as previously described in detail [ 12,13 ] . 
Moreover , as a consequence of assessment of the efﬂux pump system , the effects of TZ on the activity of genes that regulate and code for the AcrB transporter of the main efﬂux pump AcrAB -- TolC was also studied by real-time reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction ( RT-qPCR ) . 
Amongst these responses is activation of the PmrA/B two-The intrinsic resistance of Salmonella during colonisation of the Although the identiﬁcation of overexpressed efﬂux pumps in 
∗ Corresponding author . 
Tel. : +351 21 365 2600 ; fax : +351 21 363 2105 . 
E-mail address : lamaral@ihmt.unl.pt ( L. Amaral ) . 
1 Permanent address : Institute of Pharmacognosy , Faculty of Pharmacy , Univer ¬ 
sity of Szeged , Eötvös u. 6 , 6720 Szeged , Hungary . 
0924-8579 / $ -- see front matter © 2011 Elsevier B.V. and the International Society of Chemotherapy . 
All rights reserved doi :10.1016 / j.ijantimicag .2011.08.013 
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
for preparation of MH agar and MH broth . 
EtBr , TZ and carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone ( CCCP ) were also purchased from Sigma . 
Mueller -- Hinton ( MH ) powder ( Sigma , Madrid , Spain ) was used 
2.2. Bacteria
and S. Enteritidis 5408 and 5408CIP were studied . 
Salmonella Salmonella Enteritidis NCTC 13349 , S. Enteritidis 104 and 104CIP 
Enteritidis 104CIP and 5408CIP strains were derived from their respective parental strains by gradual exposure to ciproﬂoxacin , achieving high-level resistance to this antibiotic . 
Regarding 5408CIP , resistance was due to six-fold overexpression of the acrB gene that codes for the transporter of the AcrAB -- TolC efﬂux pump ; and regarding the 104CIP , resistance was due to similar overexpression of the AcrAB -- TolC efﬂux pump , two mutations in the soxS gene and a mutation in gyrase 1A [ 16 ] . 
Bacterial strains were provided by S. Fanning . 
2.3. Methods
Bacteria were cultured on MH agar and were incubated overnight . 
Thereafter , a single colony was transferred to MH broth , incubated at 37 ◦ C for 16 h and the minimum inhibitory concentration ( MIC ) of TZ was determined by microbroth dilution as per Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute ( CLSI ) guidelines [ 17 ] . 
It is necessary to know the MIC of compounds to be evaluated for effects on the efﬂux pump system as it enables the amount of compound to yield 0.25 -- 0.5 × MIC to be determined , relative concentrations that are known to have little or no effect on the viability and replication of the bacterium [ 11 ] . 
2.3.1. Detection of efﬂux pump activity
Detection of efﬂux pump activity by the Salmonella strains was conducted by a semi-automated ﬂuorometric method as described previously [ 7,12,13 ] . 
Brieﬂy , the method follows the real-time accumulation of EtBr by a bacterial population using a Rotor-Gene 3000TM thermocycler ( Corbett Research , Sydney , Australia ) programmed for 30 -- 40 cycles of 1 min each for a duration of 25 min at a constant temperature of ◦ 37 C. Bacteria were ﬁrst grown in MH broth to reach an optical density at 600 nm ( OD600 ) of 0.6 . 
Cells were then centrifuged , washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline ( PBS ) ( pH 8 ) and the OD600 adjusted to 0.6 with PBS ( pH 7.4 ) containing 0.4 % glucose . 
Aliquots of 0.045 mL were transferred to microtubes of 0.2 mL volume and immediately aliquots of 0.045 mL of saline ( pH 7.4 ) containing EtBr and glucose to yield ﬁnal concentrations of 1 mg/L and 0.4 % , respectively , with and without varying concentrations of TZ at concentrations well below the MIC , were added . 
The instrument was started and real-time accumulation of EtBr ( amount of relative ﬂuorescence emitted ) was followed up to 60 min . 
Excitation and emission wavelengths were 530 nm and 585 nm , respectively . 
2.3.2 . 
Determination of growth of Salmonella strains in the absence and presence of thioridazine Isolated colonies of the Salmonella strains were transferred to 10 mL tubes containing increasing concentrations of TZ in MH broth . 
Growth was followed spectrophotometrically at 600 nm for up to 24 h. 
2.3.3 . 
Assessment of the activity of genes that regulate and code for the AcrB transporter by real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction Isolated colonies of S. Enteritidis 104 were transferred to 10 mL tubes containing a subinhibitory concentration of TZ ( 100 mg/L ) and at intervals of 0 , 1 , 4 , 8 , 16 and 24 h of culture at 37 ◦ C the tubes were centrifuged at 1200 × g for 15 min . 
Pellets were suspended in PBS , centrifuged and re-suspended in PBS and the OD600 was adjusted to 0.6 . 
From aliquots of 1.5 mL of each tube , total RNA was isolated in an RNase-free environment using an RNeasy Protect Mini Kit ( QIAGEN , Hilden , Germany ) according to the manufacturer 's instructions . 
The integrity , purity and concentration of the extracted RNA templates were assessed by spectrophotometry at 260 nm and agarose gel ( 1.5 % ) . 
Puriﬁed RNA was stored i 
RNase-free water in siliconised tubes and was maintained at − 20 ◦ C until quantiﬁcation was performed . 
step RT-qPCR was performed in a Rotor-Gene TM ( Corbett Research ) strictly adhering to the manufacturer 's recommendations of the QuantiTect ® SYBR ® Green RT-PCR Kit ( QIAGEN ) . 
Brieﬂy , each 0.2 mL standard microfuge tube contained 12.5 L of the 2 × QuantiTect SYBR Green RT-PCR Master Mix , 0.25 L of 10 × QuantiTect RT mix , 900 nM of each primer and ca. 20 ng of total RNA in RNase-free water in a ﬁnal volume of 25 L. activity of the global regulator ramA , the stress genes soxS and rob , the local regulator marA , the transporter acrB and the two-component regulon pmrA and pmrB are shown in Table 1 . 
Real-time quantiﬁcation of the RNA templates by real-time one-3000 thermocycler The forward and reverse primers used for assessment of the 
3. Results
250 mg/L and did not vary signiﬁcantly for each strain . 
Therefore , concentrations of TZ that approached the MIC were selected for the study evaluating their effects on the efﬂux pump system of all ﬁve strains . 
and as phenothiazines inhibit the activity of many enzymes that are involved in the generation of metabolic energy , the study of the effects of TZ on efﬂux was conducted in the presence and absence of glucose in order that any effects produced by the phenothiazine that are dependent or independent of metabolic energy could be identiﬁed . 
As shown in Fig. 1A , the effect of TZ concentrations in the assay containing glucose produces increasing accumulation of EtBr in a concentration-dependent manner by the NCTC reference strain . 
However , at a concentration of 50 mg/L the amount of accumulation peaks after 10 min , after which time it begins to decrease ( efﬂux ) to a level that is similar to the accumulation produced by TZ concentrations > 20 mg/L . 
When glucose is omitted from the assay medium ( Fig. 1B ) , accumulation of EtBr promoted by 50 mg/L TZ is twice as high as that produced in the presence of glucose ( relative ﬂuorescence of 80 vs. 40 in the presence and absence of glucose , respectively ) and the peak of accumulation that takes place at 10 min is followed by efﬂux , ultimately reaching a plateau that is equal to that noted in the presence of glucose ( ca . 
relative ﬂuorescence of 20 ; Fig. 1A ) . 
Concentrations of TZ that approach the MIC produce increasingly greater accumulation earlier in time , which is followed by efﬂux . 
At a concentration that is close to the MIC , efﬂux ends when a level of relative ﬂuorescence of 60 is reached , after which time the level of accumulated EtBr remains unchanged for the duration of the assay . 
The reason for this plateau is due to the intercalation of EtBr that takes place at or close to the MIC ( extracted DNA from bacteria exposed to 200 mg/L TZ in this assay showed the presence of ﬂuorescence that disappears when DNase is added ; data not shown ) . 
Intercalated DNA is not subject to efﬂux due to its high binding constant [ 13 ] . 
The automatic efﬂux promoted by TZ in the absence of glucose subsequent to the peak of EtBr accumulation was indeed surprising given that efﬂux by Salmonella [ 20 ] and other Gram-negative bacteria is dependent upon metabolic energy in an assay where the pH is ≥ 7 [ 7,12,13 ] . 
Another surprise was that CCCP , an ionophore that by binding protons promotes the collapse of the proton-motive force ( PMF ) thereby inhibiting the activity of PMF-dependent efﬂux pumps , when added at the peak of accumulation promoted by TZ does not affect the efﬂux that takes place in glucose-free saline ( Fig. 1C ) . 
However , as is the case with Escherichia coli [ 21 ] , the presence of calcium in the assay system prevents the accumulation of EtBr produced by TZ The MIC of TZ against the ﬁve strains of Salmonella exceeded Because efﬂux at pH 7 requires a source of metabolic energy [ 19 ] efﬂux pump system of the Salmonella NCTC strain was totally dependent upon metabolic energy [ 20 ] . 
Therefore , we examined the effect of TZ on another MDR strain S. Enteritidis 5408 whose AcrAB -- TolC efﬂux pump is of an intrinsic type , i.e. it is present at a normal basal level of activity and may be subject to overexpression when the organism is exposed to a noxious agent [ 6 ] . 
At the high pH of 8 , TZ promotes the exact same response from the S. Enteritidis 104 and 5408 strains as that evident by the Salmonella NCTC reference strain when glucose is present and absent in the medium ( data not shown ) . 
In contrast , the effects of TZ on accumulation of EtBr by the progeny of 104 and 5408 that have been induced to high-level resistance to ciproﬂoxacin ( 104CIP and 5408CIP ) , do not yield a peak of accumulation that is followed by efﬂux ( data not shown ) . 
These results suggest that the overexpressed AcrAB -- TolC efﬂux pumps of these strains readily extrude the phenothiazine before it reaches the targets that promote accumulation of EtBr as is the case for the parents and for the NCTC wild-type strains . 
function of an efﬂux pump at the high of pH 8 [ 20 ] and as Salmonella has the ability to utilise fatty acids in place of glucose [ 22,23 ] , the EtBr assay was repeated with a concentration of 50 mg/L TZ and increasing concentrations of palmitic acid added in place of glucose . 
As noted in Fig. 2 , with increasing concentrations of palmitic acid the TZ-promoted accumulation of EtBr is proportionately decreased . 
These results are interpreted to signify that palmitic acid provides the needed energy for efﬂux , hence little accumulation of EtBr results . 
Moreover , because TZ inhibits enzymes that are involved in the generation of energy from metabolic sources such as glucose and their dependence on calcium [ 21 ] , and because the effects of TZ on the accumulation of EtBr are reduced or even obviated with palmitic acid , it may well be that the enzymes that act on the fatty acid for the generation of energy are either not affected by the phenothiazine or are beyond its reach . 
lowed by efﬂux may be the reason for the resistance of Salmonella to the phenothiazine . 
Exposure to chlorpromazine ( CPZ ) , a neuroleptic from which TZ is derived , inhibits the replication of S. enterica serotype Typhimurium during the ﬁrst 6 -- 8 h of culture , after which the organism becomes increasingly resistant to this phenothiazine [ 24 ] . 
Others have shown that multiples of the MIC of this phenothiazine affect genes that regulate and code for the transporter AcrB [ 25 ] . 
Because the latter study did not evaluate the activity of genes during the entire culture period of exposure to the phenothiazine CPZ , and because the activity of TZ on bacteria is similar to that of CPZ , we have examined the effects of increasing concentrations of Previous results demonstrated that at pH 8 the activity of the Since metabolic energy provides the needed protons for the The TZ-promoted increased accumulation of EtBr that is folcomponent of the regulon , pmrA . 
Activation of the PmrA/B regulon is known to activate acrB by activating pmrD [ 5 ] . 
Because activation of the PmrA/B regulon takes place under a very acid pH such as that TZ on the growth of S. Enteritidis 104 and , at intervals during the culture , assessed the expression of genes that regulate and code for the AcrB transporter . 
As seen in Fig. 3 , during the ﬁrst 6 -- 8 h the organism is not growing . 
However , during this period of no growth , a sequence of genes are overexpressed compared with their control counterparts ( no TZ ) . 
Brieﬂy , by the end of 1 h of culture , the stress gene soxS is overexpressed more than ﬁve-fold compared with that of the control ( no TZ ) and returns to normal levels of expression by the end of 4 h . 
The stress gene rob is not activated during the entire culture . 
Activation of soxS is followed by activation of the global regulator ramA , and this is followed later in the culture by activation of marA . 
By the end of 8 h of culture , the acrB gene that codes for the transporter is now overexpressed by more than 40-fold . 
By the end of 8 h of exposure to TZ , the organism is now able to extrude the noxious agent and achieve growth at its normal rate . 
Interestingly , pmrB , the sensor gene of the two-component regulon that bestows resistance in Salmonella [ 5 ] , is signiﬁcantly overexpressed by the end of 4 h and this is followed hours later by activation of the second present in an activated lysosome [ 7 ] , TZ appears to present another environmental challenge to the organism that is independent of pH. Given that TZ inhibits access to metabolic energy thereby reducing the generation of hydronium ions that rapidly decrease the pH , the mechanism by which TZ promotes activation of the PmrA/B regulon is intriguing . 
Regardless , exposure of Salmonella to the phenothiazine induces resistance to the agent as a consequence of activation of genes that regulate and code for the main efﬂux pump AcrAB . 
Because activation of the PmrA/B regulon results in the synthesis of lipid A that is introduced into the nascent LPS layer of the outer membrane , and this makes the organism resistant to practically everything [ 5 ] , the eventual resistance to the phenothiazine ( MIC > 200 mg/L ) must in part be due to activation of the PmrA/B regulon . 
al of Antimicrobial Agents 39 ( 2012 ) 16 -- 21 G. Spengler et al. / International Journ 
Fig. 1 . 
( A and B ) Effect of increasing concentrations of thioridazine ( TZ ) on accumulation of 1 mg/L ethidium bromide ( EtBr ) by Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis NCTC 13349 reference strain in an assay containing 0.4 % glucose ( A ) and in the absence of glucose ( B ) . 
( C ) Effect of carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone ( CCCP ) on TZ-promoted accumulation and efﬂux of EtBr in medium lacking or containing glucose in S. Enteritidis 104 . 
Note : the ﬁgure presents the effect of addition of CCCP at the peak of accumulation of EtBr in the assay . 
Regardless of the presence of glucose , addition of CCCP did not prevent the efﬂux that followed the TZ-promoted peak accumulation of EtBr . 
In contrast , addition of CCCP in the assays that did not contain TZ inhibited efﬂux regardless of the presence of glucose . 
The data have been normalised relative to the curves of each set ( with and without TZ ) in order that the comparison is more readily made . 
Table 1 
Forward and reverse primers used for assessment of the activity of the global regulator ramA , the stress genes soxS and rob , the local regulator marA , the transporter acrB and the two-component regulon pmrA and pmrB of Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis 104 . 
Reference 
Gene Primer sequence Amplicon size ( bp ) ( 5 ′ → 3 ′ ) 
Fw GCGGCAGGCCTAACACAT Rv GCAAGAGGCCCGAACGTC Fw CGTCATGCGGGGTATTCCAAGTG Rv CGCGCCGCCAGTTTTAGC Fw ATCCGCAGCCGTAAAATGAC Rv TGGTTCAGCGGCAGCATATA Fw AAATCGGGCTACTCCAAGTG Rv CTACAGGCGGTGACGGTAAT Fw CATTACGGCTGGGCGAGTTTACC Rv CTGGCGGAATAGTTGGCGAATGAC Fw TTTTGCAGGGCGCGGTCAGAATAC Rv TGCGGTGCCCAGCTCAACGAT Fw CGCGCAAACCGAAGGCTATG Rv GTATCGCGGGCGGTCAGAATG Fw GCGTGGGCCAGTCATTCTCTTCC Rv ATCAATACCCGGCCCCTCGTCTT 
16S rRNA 
182 
[ 16 ] 
ramA 
107 
[ 16 ] 
marA 
180 
[ 16 ] 
soxS 
217 
[ 16 ] 
rob 
180 
[ 16 ] 
acrB 
184 
[ 16 ] 
pmrA 
192 
This study 
pmrB 
299 
This study 
Fig. 2 . 
Effectofpalmiticacidonthioridazine ( TZ ) - promotedaccumulationandefﬂux of ethidium bromide ( EtBr ) by Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis NCTC 13349 in medium lacking or containing glucose or palmitic acid . 
Note : in this assay , the concentration of glucose was 0.6 % and the effects of TZ on accumulation of EtBr were not obviated . 
However , in glucose-free medium , addition of palmitic acid inhibited the effect of TZ on accumulation in a concentration-dependent manner 
4. Discussion
of S. Enteritidis to the phenothiazine TZ is at ﬁrst one of susceptibility since the organism does not grow during the ﬁrst 8 h of exposure , after which time it grows at a similar rate to the control culture lacking TZ . 
During the ﬁrst hour of exposure , assessment of the efﬂux pump system of the organism indicates rapid accumulation of the universal efﬂux pump substrate EtBr , which reaches a peak that is followed by extrusion ( efﬂux ) of the substrate . 
The efﬂux noted is not affected by CCCP or by the absence of glucose . 
The possible reason for the inability of CCCP to inhibit the TZ-promoted efﬂux of EtBr is due to the source of protons ( hydronium ions ) provided by the metabolism of fatty acids when the metabolic sources of energy such as those used by glycolysis are omitted from the assay . 
These protons ( hydronium ions ) are believed to replace those that are generated by the metabolism of glucose . 
Furthermore , it should be noted that the hydronium ions generated by metabolism are believed to pass through the efﬂux pump and thereby reduce the internal pH of the pump so that the substrate bound to the transporter can dissociate and be extruded via the ﬂow of water through the pump [ 20 ] . 
vented by the presence of calcium in the assay system . 
Assessment of the activity of genes that regulate and code for the transporter AcrB indicated that exposure to TZ activates a sequel of genes that eventually result in the overexpression of the main efﬂux pump AcrAB . 
The period during which this activation takes place is during The results obtained in this study suggest that the early response TZ-promoted accumulation of the EtBr substrate can be pre-the ﬁrst 8 h or so when the organism is not growing ( i.e. susceptible to TZ ) . 
After 8 h , with the exception of the transporter gene acrB , the genes have essentially returned to their baseline level of activity ( i.e. that of the non-TZ-exposed control ) . 
At this period of the culture , the organism grows at a similar rate to the control . 
We interpret these results to indicate that the eventual growth at high subinhibitory concentrations of TZ ( below the MIC of > 200 mg/L ) is due to the activation of genes that regulate and code for the AcrAB efﬂux pump of the organism . 
In addition , because genes of the two-component regulon PmrA/B are also activated , this regulon also contributes to the eventual resistance of the organism . 
In recent years , phenothiazines have been shown to affect the expression of genes that code for components of the cell wall of Staphylococcus aureus [ 26 ] as well as essential genes , including efﬂux pump genes , of Mycobacterium tuberculosis [ 18,27 ] . 
These studies were conducted with concentrations of TZ that exceeded the MIC against the respective organism . 
Consequently , the effects noted are not physiologically relevant since the organisms are not replicating and are possibly dead . 
With respect to the phenothiazine CPZ , effects were noted on the expression of genes that regulate and code for the AcrB transporter [ 25 ] . 
However , whereas the results of that study show activation of the global regulator ramA , the activity of the gene that codes for the transporter AcrB was depressed . 
Inhibition of acrB by CPZ is not compatible with the results of the current study with TZ and may reﬂect a difference ( s ) in their structure . 
However , wherever the two phenothiazines ( CPZ and TZ ) are examined for activities against bacteria , their effects are similar [ 28,29 ] . 
Moreover , it is difﬁcult to understand why the level of acrB activity is decreased when the global regulator ramA is increased in activity . 
However , the difference in the two approaches , where the current study was conducted on the basis of following gene expression during the entire period of exposure to TZ whereas the previous study was restricted to one interval , may account for the disparity in results . 
The effects promoted by TZ are dependent upon calcium [ 21 ] and in the current study calcium plays a similar role . 
This is consistent with the fact that binding of calcium to calcium-dependent processes is inhibited by phenothiazines such as CPZ and TZ [ 19 ] . 
We do not believe that the phenothiazine actually has a direct effect on the genes , but rather limits or obviates access to calcium by calcium signalling-dependent systems . 
That this may indeed be true is supported by the wide-ranging effects that the phenothiazine has on hundreds of genes of mycobacteria [ 18,27 ] as well as the many genes of S. aureus [ 26 ] where calcium signalling plays a major role . 
Nevertheless , it remains for future studies to assess accurately the role played by the phenothiazines in mechanisms that lead to resistance . 
Perhaps these studies will provide an additional understanding of how resistance develops in the human treated with an antimicrobial agent . 
Finally , the transition from susceptibility to TZ to eventual high resistance to this phenothiazine , in our opinion , mimics what takes place in the patient who is initially treated with an antibiotic that proves ineffective . 
Consequently , because the transition is brought about by initial exposure to a concentration of the antibiotic that is sub-effective , one would expect that use of a phenothiazine that is known to inhibit the activity of the efﬂux pump as an adjunct would be desirable . 
However , because the response to the phenothiazine also results in the transition from susceptibility to high resistance , the adjunct use of TZ or perhaps any other similar phenothiazine may actually contribute to additional resistance , perhaps even a MDR phenotype . 
This intriguing question is currently under study . 
Funding : GS was supported by grants SFRH/BPD/34578 / 2007 [ Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia ( FCT ) , Portugal ] and TÁMOP-4 .2.1 / B-09 / 1/KONV -2010 -0005 -- Creating the Center of Excellence at the University of Szeged supported by the European Union and co-ﬁnanced by the European Regional Fund 
Fig. 3 . 
Activities of genes during transient inhibition of growth from exposure to 100 mg/L thioridazine ( TZ ) on Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis 104 . 
Note : during the ﬁrst 8 h , the organism is not growing . 
However , during this period of no growth , the genes that regulate and code for the AcrB transporter are sequentially activated ; ﬁrst soxS , then followed 3 h later by ramA , marA and pmrB , and then by 8 h of culture ramA decreases its activity , marA returns to baseline activity , acrB is maximally increased in activity and pmrA is now active . 
By the end of the 16-h culture period , only acrB remains elevated in activity . 
The level of gene expression is significant when it exceeds a two-fold difference compared with that of the unexposed control . 
LR and SSC were supported by grants SFRH/BD/24931 / 2005 and SFRH/BD/44214 / 2008 , respectively , provided by FCT . 
MMa was supported by grant SFRH/BPD/63871 / 2009 ( FCT ) . 
EN was supported by an STSM grant from COST ACTION BM0701 ( ATENS ) . 
LA was supported by BCC grant SFRH/BCC/51099 / 2010 provided by the FCT , and PTDC/SAU-FCF/102807 / 2008 provided by the UPMM . 
This work was supported by EU-FSE/FEDER-PTDC/BIA-MIC / 105509/2008 and EU-FSE/FEDERPTDC/SAU-FCF / 102807/2008 from the FCT . 
Competing interests : None declared . 
Ethical approval : Not required . 
References 
[ 10 ] Martins A , Iversen C , Rodrigues L , Spengler G , Ramos J , Kern WV , et al. . 
An AcrAB - [ 11 ] Pagès JM , Amaral L. Mechanisms of drug efﬂux and strategies to combat them : [ 12 ] Viveiros M , Rodrigues L , Martins M , Couto I , Spengler G , Martins A , et al. . 
Eval - [ 1 ] Olsen SJ , MacKinnon LC , Goulding JS , Bean NH , Slutsker L. Surveillance for foodborne-disease outbreaks -- United States , 1993 -- 1997 . 
MMWR CDC Surveill Summ 2000 ; 49:1 -- 62 . 
[ 2 ] Mead PS , Slutsker L , Dietz V , McCaig LF , Bresee JS , Shapiro C , et al. . 
Food-related illness and death in the United States . 
Emerg Infect Dis 1999 ; 5:607 -- 25 . 
[ 3 ] Todd EC , Greig JD , Bartleson CA , Michaels BS . 
Outbreaks where food workers have been implicated in the spread of foodborne disease . 
Part 5 . 
Sources of contamination and pathogen excretion from infected persons . 
J Food Prot 2008 ; 71:2582 -- 95 . 
[ 4 ] Buzio M , Shoshtari Mahmoud K , Memore L , Cotogni P. Perforation of the small intestine . 
Minerva Chir 1999 ; 54:851 -- 4 [ in Italian ] . 
[ 5 ] Gunn JS . 
The Salmonella PmrAB regulon : lipopolysaccharide modiﬁcations , antimicrobial peptide resistance and more . 
Trends Microbiol 2008 ; 16:284 -- 90 . 
[ 6 ] Amaral L , Viveiros M , Fanning S , Pages JM , Couto I , Spengler G , et al. . 
Genetic regulation , physiology , assessment and inhibition of efﬂux pumps responsible for multi-drug resistant phenotypes of bacterial pathogens . 
In : Bonilla AR , Muniz KP , editors . 
Antibiotic resistance : causes and risk factors , mechanisms and alternatives . 
New York , NY : Nova Science Publishers , Inc. ; 2009 . 
p. 313 -- 32 . 
[ 7 ] Martins A , Spengler G , Rodrigues L , Viveiros M , Ramos J , Martins M , et al. pH modulation of efﬂux pump activity of multi-drug resistant Escherichia coli : protection during its passage and eventual colonization of the colon . 
PLoS One 2009 ; 4 : e6656 . 
[ 8 ] Randall LP , Woodward MJ . 
Multiple antibiotic resistance ( mar ) locus in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium DT104 . 
Appl Environ Microbiol 2001 ; 67:1190 -- 7 . 
[ 9 ] Viveiros M , Rodrigues L , Dupont M , Martins M , Couto I , Pagès JM , et al. . 
Antibiotic stress , genetic response and altered permeability of E. coli . 
PLoS One 2007 ; 2 : e365 . 
mediated multidrug-resistant phenotype is maintained following restoration of wild-type activities by efﬂux pump genes and their regulators . 
Int J Antimicrob Agents 2009 ; 34:602 -- 4 . 
challenging the efﬂux pump of Gram-negative bacteria . 
Biochim Biophys Acta 2009 ; 1794:826 -- 33 . 
uation of efﬂux activity of bacteria by a semi-automated ﬂuorometric system . 
Methods Mol Biol 2010 ; 642:159 -- 72 . 
[ 13 ] Viveiros M , Martins A , Paixão L , Rodrigues L , Martins M , Couto I , et al. [ 14 ] Kristiansen JE , Thomsen VF , Martins A , Viveiros M , Amaral L. Non - [ 15 ] Takács D , Cerca P , Martins A , Riedl Z , Hajós G , Molnár J , et al. . 
Evaluation of forty [ 16 ] O'Regan E , Quinn T , Pagès JM , McCusker M , Piddock L , Fanning S. Multiple [ 17 ] Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute . 
Performance standards for [ 18 ] Dutta NK , Mazumdar K , Dastidar SG , Karakousis PC , Amaral L. New patentable [ 19 ] Amaral L , Viveiros M , Molnar J. Antimicrobial activity of phenothiazines . 
In Vivo [ 20 ] Amaral L , Cerca P , Spengler G , Machado L , Couto I , Viveiros M , et al. . 
Ethidium [ 21 ] Martins A , Machado L , Costa S , Cerca P , Spengler G , Viveiros M , et al. . 
Role of [ 22 ] Evans MR , Fink RC , Vazquez-Torres A , Porwollik S , Jones-Carson J , McClelland [ 23 ] Calhoun LN , Liyanage R , Lay Jr JO , Kwon YM . 
Proteomic analysis of Salmonella [ 24 ] Amaral L , Kristiansen JE , Frolund Thomsen V , Markovich B . 
The effects of [ 25 ] Bailey AM , Paulsen IT , Piddock LJ . 
RamA confers multidrug resistance in [ 26 ] Bonde M , Højland DH , Kolmos HJ , Kallipolitis BH , Klitgaard JK . 
Thioridazine [ 27 ] Dutta NK , Mehra S , Kaushal D . 
A Mycobacterium tuberculosis sigma factor net - [ 28 ] Amaral L , Kristiansen JE , Abebe LS , Millett W. Inhibition of the respiration of [ 29 ] Bettencourt MV , Bosne-David S , Amaral L. Comparative in vitro activity of Demonstration of intrinsic efﬂux activity of Escherichia coli K-12 AG100 by an automated ethidium bromide method . 
Int J Antimicrob Agents 2008 ; 31:458 -- 62 . 
antibiotics reverse resistance of bacteria to antibiotics . 
In Vivo 2010 ; 24 : 751 -- 4 . 
new phenothiazine derivatives for activity against intrinsic efﬂux pump systems of reference Escherichia coli , Salmonella Enteritidis , Enterococcus faecalis and Staphylococcus aureus strains . 
In Vivo 2011 ; 25:719 -- 24 . 
regulatory pathways associated with high-level ciproﬂoxacin and multidrug resistance in Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis : involvement of RamA and other global regulators . 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2009 ; 53 : 1080 -- 7 . 
antimicrobial susceptibility testing ; seventeenth informational supplement . 
Document M100-S17 . 
Wayne , PA : CLSI ; 2007 . 
use of an old neuroleptic compound thioridazine to combat tuberculosis : a gene regulation perspective . 
Recent Pat Antiinfect Drug Discov 2011 ; 6 : 128 -- 38 . 
2004 ; 18:725 -- 31 . 
bromide efﬂux by Salmonella : modulation by metabolic energy , pH , ions and phenothiazines . 
Int J Antimicrob Agents 2011 ; 38:140 -- 5 . 
calcium in efﬂux system of Escherichia coli . 
Int J Antimicrob Agents 2011 ; 37 : 410 -- 4 . 
M , et al. . 
Analysis of the ArcA regulon in anaerobically grown Salmonella enterica sv . 
Typhimurium . 
BMC Microbiol 2011 ; 11:58 . 
enterica serovar Enteritidis following propionate adaptation . 
BMC Microbiol 2010 ; 10:249 . 
chlorpromazine on the outer cell wall of Salmonella typhimurium in ensuring resistance to the drug . 
Int J Antimicrob Agents 2000 ; 14:225 -- 9 . 
Salmonella enterica via increased expression of acrB , which is inhibited by chlorpromazine . 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2008 ; 52:3604 -- 11 . 
affects transcription of genes involved in cell wall biosynthesis in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus . 
FEMS Microbiol Lett 2011 ; 318:168 -- 76 . 
work responds to cell-envelope damage by the promising anti-mycobacterial thioridazine . 
PLoS One 2010 ; 5 : e10069 . 
multi-drug resistant clinical isolates of Mycobacterium tuberculosis by thioridazine : potential use for initial therapy of freshly diagnosed tuberculosis . 
J Antimicrob Chemother 1996 ; 38:1049 -- 53 . 
phenothiazines against multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis . 
Int J Antimicrob Agents 2000 ; 16:69 -- 71