Gaussia princeps Luciferase as a Reporter for Transcriptional Activity, Protein Secretion, and Protein-Protein Interactions in Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium
Thorsten Wille , Kathrin Blank , Christiane Schmidt , Vivien Vogt , and Roman G. Gerlach 
Junior Research Group 3 , Robert Koch Institute , Wernigerode Branch , Wernigerode , Germany 
Gaussia princeps luciferase ( Gluc ) is widely used as a reporter in eukaryotes , but data about its applicability in bacteria are very limited . 
Here we show that a codon-optimized Gluc gene can be efﬁciently expressed in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimu-rium . 
To test different Gluc variants as transcriptional reporters , we used the siiA promoter of Salmonella pathogenicity island 4 ( SPI-4 ) driving expression of either an episomal or a chromosomally integrated Gluc gene . 
Most reliable results were obtained from lysates of single-copy Gluc reporter strains . 
Given the small size , high activity , and cofactor independence of Gluc , it might be especially suited to monitor secretion of bacterial proteins . 
We demonstrate its usefulness by luminescence detection of fusion proteins of Gluc and C-terminal portions of the SPI-4-encoded , type I-secreted adhesin SiiE in supernatants . 
The SiiE C-terminal moiety including immunoglobulin ( Ig ) domain 53 is essential and sufﬁcient for mediating type I-dependent secretion of Gluc . 
In eukaryotes , protein-protein interaction studies based on split-Gluc protein complementation assays ( PCA ) could be established . 
We adapted these methods for use in Salmonella , demonstrating the interaction between the SPI-1-encoded effector SipA and its cognate secretion chaperone InvB . 
In conclusion , the versatile Gluc can be used to address a variety of biological questions , thus representing a valuable addition to the toolbox of modern molecular biology and microbiology . 
The luciferase from the marine copepod Gaussia princeps ( Gluc ) is the smallest ( 19.9-kDa ) coelenterazine ( CTZ ) - utilizing luciferase known thus far . 
A humanized variant of Gluc ( hGluc ) , which was codon optimized for expression in cultured mamma-lian cells , has been widely used as a reporter gene ( 26 ) . 
Gaussia luciferase exhibits an activity up to 1,000-fold higher than to Renilla reniformis luciferase ( Rluc ) , ﬁreﬂy luciferase ( Fluc ) ( 26 ) , or bacterial luciferases ( LuxAB ) ( 30 ) . 
The outstanding sensitivity of Gluc-based assays was previously demonstrated detecting as low as 10 18 mol puriﬁed Gluc ( 27 ) or one eukaryotic cell transiently expressing Gluc ( 25 ) . 
Gluc shares with Rluc its independence of any host-derived cofactors . 
Additionally , Gluc shows a good robustness regarding changes in pH ( 12 , 30 ) , heat shock , and hydrogen peroxide ( 30 ) . 
A split form of Gluc was applied as a reporter in protein complementation assays ( PCA ) to assess protein-protein interactions ( 15 , 23 ) . 
The suitability of Gluc as a reporter gene was also shown in certain nonmammalian model organisms . 
Gluc genes codon optimized for expression in the respective hosts were used in reporter assays with the fungus pathogen Candida albicans ( 5 ) and the bacteria Mycobacterium smegmatis ( 1 , 30 ) and Mycobacterium tuberculosis ( 1 ) as well as the alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii ( 24 ) . 
Recently , heterologous expression of highly active and soluble Gluc in Escherichia coli was reported , suggesting its usefulness as a reporter gene in Enterobacteriaceae ( 22 ) . 
Besides E. coli , one of the best characterized member of the Enterobacteriaceae is Salmonella enterica . 
Salmonella enterica sero-var Typhimurium is a model pathogen able to cause gastroenteritis in humans and a typhoid fever-like disease in mice which is used to study many aspects of Salmonella pathogenicity . 
Most of its virulence functions are encoded within horizontally acquired regions on the genome called Salmonella pathogenicity islands ( SPI ) ( 8 ) . 
SPI-1 and SPI-2 encode type III secretion systems ( T3SS ) enabling the pathogen to invade nonphagocytic cells and to survive within host cells , respectively . 
We recently were able to show that another pathogenicity island , SPI-4 , functionally cooperates with SPI-1 to facilitate the invasion of polarized epithelial cells ( 6 ) . 
SPI-4 codes for a type I secretion system ( T1SS ) consisting of three subunits : the inner membrane ABC ( ATP binding cassette ) protein SiiF energizing the transport , the periplasmic adaptor protein ( PAP ) SiiD , and outer membrane pore-forming protein ( OMP ) SiiC ( 11 ) . 
The T1SS substrate SiiE , a giant non-ﬁmbrial adhesion , is secreted via a C-terminal signal sequence and subsequently mediates intimate contact to the apical host cell membrane , allowing SPI-1-dependent effector injection and bacterial invasion ( 6 ) . 
SiiE is of repetitive structure , comprising 53 domains of the immunoglobulin ( Ig ) fold as well as beta-sheets and coiled-coils within its N terminus ( 28 ) . 
With this study , we set out to establish Gluc as a reporter protein for ( i ) transcriptional activity , ( ii ) protein secretion , and ( iii ) protein-protein interactions in S. Typhimurium . 
Gluc uniquely combines small size with very high activity , which has great potential for future applications . 
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cloning . 
A description of the cloning procedures can be found in the supplemental material . 
All primers used in this study can be found in Table S1 in the supplemental material . 
An overview about the plasmids used is given in Table S2 . 
All constructs were initially screened by colony 
Received 25 August 2011 Accepted 17 October 2011 Published ahead of print 21 October 2011 
Address correspondence to Roman G. Gerlach , gerlachr@rki.de . 
Supplemental material for this article may be found at http://aem.asm.org/ . 
Copyright © 2012 , American Society for Microbiology . 
All Rights Reserved . 
doi :10.1128 / AEM.06670-11 
PCR using suitable check primers and ﬁnally veriﬁed by restriction analysis and sequencing . 
Generation of chromosomal fusions . 
Paired primers SiiA-Gluc-for and SiiA-RedRep-rev were used to amplify Gluc or GlucM43I together with a kanamycin resistance cassette from pWRG168 or pWRG215 . 
Insertion of Gluc in the chromosome by using Red recombinase was carried out as described previously ( 9 ) . 
Successful integration was screened with primers SiiA-Check-for and Gluc-Check-rev and veriﬁed by sequencing . 
All fusions were transferred in fresh wild-type ( WT ) background or , in the case of WRG64 and WRG84 , in a sirA background ( MvP896 ) by means of P22 HT105/1 int-201 transduction . 
All strains used are listed in Table 1 . 
Preparation of bacterial lysates . 
The optical density at 600 nm ( OD600 ) of bacterial cultures was determined , and an equivalent of 0.5 OD600 was removed . 
The supernatant was removed by centrifugation ( 8,000 g , 5 min , 4 °C ) , and bacteria were resuspended in 40 l of assay buffer : 10 mM Tris-HCl ( pH 7.8 ) , 0.6 M NaCl , 1 mM EDTA ( buffer A ) ( 27 ) . 
An equal amount of 0.1-mm glass beads ( BioSpec Products , Bartles-ville , OK ) was added to the bacterial suspensions on ice , and cells were lysed using a bead beater device ( TurboMix ; Scientiﬁc Industries , Bohe-mia , NY ) for 5 min at an 80 % power setting . 
Lysates were cleared by centrifugation ( 14,000 g , 10 min , 4 °C ) and could be stored at 20 °C for several days without signiﬁcant loss of Gluc activity ( data not shown ) . 
Gluc overexpression in Salmonella . 
Overnight cultures of strains harboring pBAD24-derived Gluc expression vectors were grown to midlog phase ( OD600 , 0.5 to 0.8 ) and L - ( ) - arabinose ( Sigma-Aldrich , Sch-nelldorf , Germany ) was added to a ﬁnal concentration of 10 mM to induce Gluc expression . 
After 1 h of induction , samples were prepared for luminescence assays . 
Sample preparation to detect secretion of Gluc-SiiE fusions . 
Over-night cultures were reinoculated at 1:100 in 3 ml of fresh LB and grown under aeration for 6 h. OD600 was determined and supernatants and pellets from 1 ml of culture were collected by centrifugation ( 8,000 g , 10 min , 4 °C ) . 
Supernatants were sterile ﬁltered using 0.2 - m syringe ﬁlters ( Acrodisc HT Tuffryn ; Pall Life Sciences , Dreieich , Germany ) . 
Pellets were resuspended in 800 l of assay buffer and subjected to lysis using a bead beater as described above . 
Sample preparation for split-Gluc approach . 
Overnight cultures were reinoculated at 1:31 in 3 ml of fresh LB and grown under aeration to mid-log phase ( OD600 , 0.5 to 0.8 ) phase . 
After the addition of 50-ng/ml anhydrotetracycline ( AHT ; Sigma-Aldrich , Schnelldorf , Germany ) to induce expression from PtetA , cultures were allowed to grow until 4 h after reinoculation . 
OD600 was determined and bacterial pellets from 1 ml and 0.5 ml of culture were collected by centrifugation ( 8,000 g , 10 min , 4 °C ) . 
The pellet from 1 ml of culture was resuspended in 160 l of assay buffer and subsequently used for luminescence detection in whole cells . 
The pellet from 0.5 ml of culture was resuspended in 400 l of assay buffer and subjected to lysis using a bead beater as described above . 
Luciferase assays . 
To measure Gluc activity of transcriptional fusions and of Gluc expressed from pBAD24-derived vectors , 40 l of assay buffer containing 12.5 M native CTZ ( Biotium , Hayward , CA , or Synchem , Felsberg , Germany ) was added to a 10 - l aliquot of the bacterial suspensions or dilutions of bacterial lysates as indicated . 
To detect luciferase activity of Gluc-SiiE fusion proteins or split-Gluc constructs , 10 l of assay buffer containing 50 M native CTZ ( Synchem ) was added to 40 - l undiluted samples . 
Native CTZ and different CTZ variant ( sampler kit ; Biotium ) stock solutions of 10 mM in methanol were stored at 70 °C . 
Dilutions of CTZ stocks in assay buffer were stable for several days at 20 °C ( data not shown ) . 
Luminescence measurements were carried out in 96-well white ﬂat-bottom plates ( Thermo Nunc , Langenselbold , Germany ) by using an Inﬁnite M1000 plate reader equipped with a photon counter detector ( Tecan , Grödig , Austria ) . 
The reaction was started by well-wise addition of the substrate either manually or by injection . 
Signals were integrated over 1 s , and those exceeding the detection limit of 107 light counts per second ( LCPS ) were weakened by an OD1 ﬁlter . 
Bacterial two-hybrid ( BacTH ) assay . 
E. coli reporter strain BTH101 ( 14 ) was freshly transformed with combinations of two plasmids each coding for fusion proteins with the T18 or T25 fragments derived from CyaA under the control of an IPTG ( isopropyl - - D-thiogalactopyranoside ) - inducible promoter . 
After transformation , 3 - l bacterial suspensions were spotted onto LB plates containing 25 g/ml kanamycin ( Carl Roth , Mannheim , Germany ) , 50 g/ml carbenicillin ( Carl Roth ) , and 100 M IPTG ( Fermentas , St. Leon-Rot , Germany ) as well as 40 g/ml X-Gal ( 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl - - D-galactopyranoside ; Fermentas ) as an indicator for LacZ activity . 
Plates were incubated at 30 °C for 42 h , and colonies were documented using a digital camera . 
Electrophoresis and Western blotting . 
Secreted protein fraction was obtained by trichloroacetic acid ( TCA ) ( Carl Roth ) precipitation of 10-ml culture supernatants as described before ( 11 ) . 
Polyacrylamide gel electro-phoresis ( PAGE ) was carried out according to standard protocols using a Mini-Protean Tetra cell system ( Bio-Rad Laboratories , Munich , Germany ) or NuPAGE 4 to 12 % Bis-Tris gradient gels ( Invitrogen , Karlsruhe , Germany ) . 
Semidry Western blotting was done in a Trans-Blot SD cell ( Bio-Rad ) at 1 mA/cm2 for 1 h. Antibodies against Gluc ( New England BioLabs , Frankfurt am Main , Germany ) , the Salmonella ﬂagellar antigen ( FliC ) ( clone 4H2 ; Biotrend , Cologne , Germany ) , or DnaK ( clone 8E2/2 ; Enzo Life Sciences , Lörrach , Germany ) were applied overnight after blotting . 
Bound antibodies were subsequently detected with anti-mouse and anti-rabbit horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) - coupled secondary antibodies ( Jackson Immuno Research/Dianova , Hamburg , Germany ) using a Chemi-Smart 3000 chemiluminescence system ( Vilber Lourmat , Eberhardzell , Germany ) . 
Blot images were processed ( marker overlay , tonal range , 16 - to 8-bit conversion ) using Photoshop CS5 ( Adobe Systems , Munich , Germany ) . 
Source or reference 
Relevant characteristic ( s ) a 
Strain 
S. Typhimurium 
NCTC 12023 WT , Nals , isogenic to ATCC 14028 NCTC , Colindale , UK siiF FRT 11 invC FRT 6 sirA FRT 32 siiA : : Gluc aph , Kanr This study siiA : : GlucM43I aph , Kanr This study sirA FRT siiA : : GlucM43I aph , Kanr This study sirA FRT siiA : : Gluc aph , Kanr This study 
MvP812 MvP818 MvP896 WRG34 WRG42 WRG64 WRG84 
E. coli 
4 
F cya-99 araD139 galE15 galK16 rpsL1 ( Strr ) hsdR2 mcrA1 mcrB1 a FRT , FLP recombination target . 
BTH101 
1 
RESULTS
Gluc expression and substrate speciﬁcity in S. Typhimurium . 
For establishing Gaussia luciferase as a reporter in S. Typhimu-rium , we used a Gluc gene variant codon optimized for expression in Salmonella enterica ( Geneart , Regensburg , Germany ) . 
Expression of full-length Gluc including the coding sequence for the eukaryotic secretion signal comprising amino acids ( aa ) 1 to 17 was previously found to be problematic in bacteria ( 12 , 19 ) . 
Therefore , we omitted codons 2 to 17 of wild-type Gluc , generating GlucM18-185 , which was used as `` Gluc '' in all subsequent experiments . 
Inouye and Sahara ( 12 ) showed that puriﬁed Gluc has a narrow substrate spectrum and that only native CTZ is a useful substrate for Gluc . 
We tested different commercially available 
1 
CTZ variants as substrates for Gluc in lysates and whole bacterial cells . 
S. Typhimurium harboring pBAD24-Gluc ( GenBank accession no . 
HM241886 ) was used for the expression of Gluc by the addition of 10 mM arabinose . 
With Gluc-containing Salmonella lysates , native CTZ showed the highest initial light counts , 1 to 2 orders of magnitude higher than those of f-CTZ , h-CTZ , or i-CTZ ( see Fig . 
S1A in the supplemental material ) . 
With hcp-CTZ and fcp-CTZ as substrates , which should give highest light emission with RLuc ( manufacturer 's information ) , Gluc had the lowest activity , starting with 104 LCPS and decreasing to less than 400 LCPS in about 4 min ( see Fig . 
S1A ) . 
Gluc light emission with whole cells and native CTZ was almost 3 orders of magnitude lower than that of lysates ( see Fig . 
S1B ) . 
Whereas light emission kinetics with ly-sates followed the rapid decay typical for ﬂash-type luciferases , a slight increase in LCPS reaching a plateau after 3 min was observed with whole cells ( see Fig . 
S1B ) . 
The amount of light emitted by Gluc depends on the ﬁnal substrate concentration . 
With Gluc-expressing M. smegmatis , there is a linear relationship between luminescence and substrate concentration between 0.1 M and 10 M CTZ ( 30 ) . 
Using whole cells or a 1:100 dilution of Salmonella lysates , we tested native CTZ in concentrations between 0.01 M and 100 M ( Fig. 1A ) . 
Robust detection of light emission was possible starting from 0.05 M CTZ . 
There was a linear relationship between light counts and substrate concentration in the range between 0.75 M and 10 M CTZ ( R2 0.99 ) using cell lysates ( Fig. 1B ) . 
Whole cells exhibited a linear trend between 5 M and 75 M ( R2 0.97 ) ( Fig. 1C ) . 
Saturation of light emission could be observed starting from 25 M and 100 M CTZ with lysates and whole cells , respectively ( Fig. 1A ) . 
In PCA , an earlier saturation of light emission , starting already at 10 M CTZ , was observed ( 23 ) . 
With increasing concentrations , the background arising from CTZ auto-oxidation might become a problem ( 27 ) . 
As a compromise , we therefore used a ﬁnal concentration of 10 M CTZ in all further assays . 
Gluc as plasmid-based transcriptional reporter . 
To demonstrate the usability of Gluc as a transcriptional reporter , we chose the SPI-4 virulence locus as an example . 
It was previously shown that the expression of SPI-4 is coregulated with SPI-1-encoded invasion genes and depends on transcriptional regulators SirA and HilA ( 10 , 20 ) . 
In vitro , SPI-1 and SPI-4 expression is induced during late exponential growth in rich medium ( 10 ) . 
The six genes of SPI-4 , siiA to siiF , seem to form one operon whose expression is driven from a promoter upstream of siiA ( 10 ) . 
To generate the Gluc reporter plasmid pWRG169 , we modiﬁed the midcopy vector pGEN-luxCDABE ( 16 ) , exchanging the lux operon with the Gluc gene combined with an optimized ribosome binding site ( RBS ) ( 4 ) . 
Subsequently , an 1-kb fragment 5 = of siiA containing the putative siiA promoter was cloned in pWRG169 , yielding pWRG170 . 
pWRG170 was transferred in S. Typhimurium wild type ( WT ) and the isogenic sirA-deﬁcient strain MvP896 ( 32 ) . 
Luminescence activities of lysates ( Fig. 2A ) and whole cells ( see Fig . 
S2A in the supplemental material ) were determined in a kinetics assay over 6 h postinoculation . 
All strains tested showed comparable growth kinetics by means of OD600 measurements ( data not shown ) . 
Using the siiA promoter to express Gluc , we observed the characteristic induction peak during late logarithmic growth in WT [ PsiiA : : Gluc ] ( Fig. 2A ) . 
The sirA-deﬁcient strain showed reduced luminescence activity at the level of the WT harboring the promoterless vector . 
The Gluc reporter plasmid without promoter exhibited signiﬁcant background activity ( Fig. 2A ) . 
Around 4 h after reinoculation , maximum activity of SPI-4 expression was observed using both whole cells and lysates . 
With whole cells ( see Fig . 
S2A ) , the maximum luminescence was about 10-fold lower than that of the 1:10 dilution of lysates ( Fig. 2A ) . 
In contrast to previous data obtained with Fluc reporters ( 10 ) , the differences in activity between the WT and the sirA strain were much lower , reaching only about 10-fold ( whole cells ) and 5-fold ( lysates ) at 4 h postinoculation . 
Furthermore , plasmid-based Gluc assays showed signiﬁcant variability between individual experiments , as indicated by high standard deviations ( Fig. 2A ; also see Fig . 
S2A ) . 
Gluc as chromosomally encoded transcriptional reporter . 
To address the problem of high background activity and variability , single-copy Gluc reporter strains were generated . 
We made use of our previously introduced technique and integrated Gluc within the Salmonella genome with the help of Red recombinase ( 9 ) . 
To test the activity of chromosomally integrated Gluc , we exchanged the siiA open reading frame ( ORF ) of the Gluc gene by use of a targeting construct generated by PCR with template vector pWRG168 . 
The resulting strain , WRG34 , harbors a start codon fusion of the Gluc gene to siiA , placing the Gluc gene in the same genomic context under the same regulatory elements as siiA . 
As a control , the Gluc reporter construct was transferred in the isogenic sirA-deﬁcient strain MvP896 by means of P22 phage transduction , yielding strain WRG84 . 
Bacterial lysates ( Fig. 2B ) and whole cells ( see Fig . 
S2B in the supplemental material ) were collected as described above . 
The maximum activity of SPI-4 expression occurred at 3.5 h and 4 h after reinoculation detecting Gluc in lysates and whole cells , respectively . 
In contrast to our previous results with the plasmid-based reporter ( Fig. 2A ) , strain WRG84 lacking the global regulator SirA showed nearly no background activity . 
During late logarithmic growth , lysates of WRG34 ( siiA : : Gluc ) show luminescence activity up to 200-fold higher than those seen for WRG84 ( sirA siiA : : Gluc ) ( Fig. 2B ) . 
If whole cells were compared , a 16-fold difference was still observed at peak activity between the two strains ( see Fig . 
S2B ) . 
Gluc mutant with higher luminescence activity . 
Mutational analysis of the Gluc protein was conducted recently in two independent studies to screen for Gluc variants with more-favorable light emission kinetics and higher activity ( 19 , 29 ) . 
Both groups identiﬁed methionine residues to be of critical importance . 
Exchange of methionine to isoleucine ( M43I ) and leucine ( M43L , M110L ) both led to an increased half-life of light emission . 
We modiﬁed Gluc with the M43I mutation suggested by Maguire et al. ( 19 ) , which should offer both stabilized and high light emission compared to the WT . 
Lysates were obtained from Salmonella expressing GlucM43I from pBAD-GlucM43I . 
Comparing the light emission kinetics of lysates containing GlucM43I or WT Gluc over 15 min revealed higher and prolonged activity of GlucM43I ( see Fig . 
S3 in the supplemental material ) . 
The M43I mutation led to an initial 2.6-fold increase in luminescence activity compared to the WT . 
Whereas WT Gluc light emission decreased within 90 s to 4.1 % , more than one-fourth of GlucM43I activity was still present after the same time ( see Fig . 
S3 ) . 
We tested the performance of GlucM43I as a transcriptional reporter by chromosomal exchange of siiA ORF in Salmonella WT and MvP896 sirA backgrounds , resulting in strains WRG42 and WRG64 , respectively . 
When luminescence activity was measured in a 6-h time course , GlucM43I exhibited 20 % higher peak activity during late logarithmic growth ( Fig. 2A ) . 
Gluc is not naturally secreted in S. Typhimurium . 
The high sensitivity of Gluc-based reporter systems enables direct extracellular luminescence detection , as demonstrated recently using mouse urine and blood samples ( 31 ) . 
These studies showed clearly Gluc being superior , with respect to stability , sensitivity , and detection range , to the established secretion reporter SAP ( secretory alkaline phosphatase ) . 
Two prerequisites should be fulﬁlled to apply Gluc as a secretion reporter in bacteria . 
First , there should be a difference in activity and/or substrate accessibility of intra - and extracellularly localized Gluc . 
We found in Salmonella an 2,000-fold difference in luminescence activity comparing whole cells and lysates , demonstrating that the Gram-negative cell envelope represents a diffusion barrier for CTZ , limiting substrate availability for intracellular Gluc ( see Fig . 
S1 ) . 
Second , Gluc and Gluc fusion proteins must not be secreted naturally in signiﬁcant amounts . 
It was shown recently that M. smegmatis releases large amounts of Gluc in culture supernatants regardless of the presence or absence of its natural secretion signal ( 1 ) . 
We tested the superna-tants of Salmonella cultures for luminescence activity where Gluc or GlucM43I expression was induced from pBAD24-based vectors . 
Figure 3A shows luminescence activity of cell pellets , cell lysates , and supernatants . 
We found the vast majority of Gluc activity associated with cells , resulting in a several-thousand-fold difference in luminescence compared to supernatants ( Fig. 3A ) . 
Although luminescence can be readily detected in supernatants , most of the protein is retained within the cytosol even under the unfavorable condition of very high Gluc expression levels . 
Gluc fusion proteins can monitor T1S . 
To test whether Gluc is suitable monitoring type I secretion ( T1S ) , we set out to characterize the C-terminal signal sequence of the T1SS substrate SiiE . 
Previously , mutational analyses in conjunction with Western blots and a customized SiiE-speciﬁc enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) led to the identiﬁcation of a C-terminal portion including Ig domain 53 to be essential for mediating SiiE transport via the siiCDF-encoded T1SS ( 11 , 28 ) . 
In a complementary setup , we constructed fusion proteins consisting of an N-terminal GlucM43I and different C-terminal moieties of SiiE to deﬁne the minimal secretion signal . 
A detailed overview of all constructs can be found in Fig. 3B : a fusion protein consisting of Gluc and the last four Ig domains of SiiE ( Ig50 to 53 [ Ig50-53 ] ) is efﬁciently secreted as culture supernatants showing high luminescence activity after 6 h of growth ( Fig. 3C ) . 
If the construct was transferred in a strain lacking the ABC protein SiiF or a stop codon was introduced between Gluc and SiiE Ig50-53 , almost no lucifer-ase activity could be detected in the supernatants ( Fig. 3C ) . 
When only Ig domain 53 of SiiE was fused to the C terminus of Gluc , luminescence activity could be detected in supernatants , but reaching less than 5 % of the level seen for the Ig50-53 fusion protein ( Fig. 3C ) . 
Deletion of the ﬁrst 15 N-terminal amino acids of Ig53 abolished the ability to mediate T1S of Gluc , which is consistent with previous results from SiiE mutational analysis ( 28 ) . 
As a control , we did Western blots to detect the secreted fusion proteins in precipitated supernatants . 
In all the superna-tants with signiﬁcant luciferase activity , a signal was detectable with an anti-Gluc antibody ( see Fig . 
S4 , top panel , in the supplemental material ) . 
The theoretical molecular masses were calculated as 69.7 kDa and 34.8 kDa for Gluc : : SiiE-Ig50-53 and Gluc : : SiiE-Ig53 , respectively . 
The signal intensity of the smaller fusion protein was very low compared to that of Gluc : : SiiE-Ig50-53 ( see Fig . 
S4 ) . 
As a loading control , the ﬂagellar antigen FliC was detected in the supernatant samples ( see Fig . 
S4 , middle panel ) . 
This result is in good correlation with the decreased luminescence activity of this construct detected in supernatants ( Fig. 3C ) . 
To check for signiﬁcant bacterial lysis , which might lead to unspeciﬁc Gluc release , samples from supernatants were probed for the cytosolic marker protein DnaK . 
DnaK was not detected except in a bacterial pellet sample included as a positive control ( see Fig . 
S4 , bottom panel ) . 
Given the big difference in luminescence activity comparing intra - and extracellular Gluc ( Fig. 3A ) , we speculated that this effect based on substrate availability enables detection of secreted Gluc in whole cultures . 
Indeed , we measured very similar Gluc activities regardless of using whole cultures or sterile-ﬁltered culture supernatants ( Fig. 3C ) . 
Comparing individual fusion proteins in quantitative assays might be difﬁcult due to differences in the expression levels and/or protein stabilities of the respective fusions . 
Measuring the Gluc activity in cell lysates is a convenient way to detect such differences and enables easy normalization . 
We detected comparable luciferase activities in bacterial lysates expressing different Gluc fusion proteins , which indicates similar protein stabilities and expression levels ( Fig. 3C ) . 
Split-Gluc approach to detect protein-protein interactions in Salmonella . 
The high sensitivity , good signal-to-noise ratio , and simplicity of assays demonstrated in our previous results prompted us to evaluate the usability of the split-Gluc PCA to investigate protein-protein interactions in Salmonella . 
In PCA , a reporter protein is split into two halves , and these parts are fused to putative interaction partners . 
If interaction via the fusion proteins occurs , the protein is reconstituted from its parts , thereby restoring reporter activity ( 2 ) . 
Two reports suggested two different split sites for optimal complementation results with Gluc : Remy and Michnick ( 23 ) split Gluc between G109 and E110 , whereas Kim et al. ( 15 ) divided the enzyme between Q105 and G106 ( Fig. 4B ) . 
We compared both variants side by side employing a known Salmonella protein-protein interaction as an example . 
The interaction of T3SS effectors with their cognate type III secretion chaperones is absolutely essential for the subsequent translocation through the T3SS needle complex ( 3 ) . 
The SPI-1-encoded secretion chaperone InvB was shown to bind the effectors SipA , SopA , SopE , and SopE2 ( 3 , 17 ) . 
The chaperone binding domain ( CBD ) of SipA , which is recognized by InvB , could be localized to the ﬁrst 47 N-terminal amino acids , and truncated SipA variants lacking this part were unable to form stable complexes with InvB in vitro ( 18 ) . 
To test this interaction in our split-Gluc approach , we fused full-length SipA or an N-terminally truncated SipA48 -- 685 with either Gluc106 -- 185 or Gluc110 -- 185 . 
Correspondingly , Gluc18 -- 105 or Gluc18 -- 109 was fused to the C terminus of full-length InvB lacking its stop codon . 
An overview about the constructs is given in Fig. 4C . 
The corresponding Gluc fusion proteins were cloned together in a low-copy-number plasmid as an operon structure under the control of a tetracycline-inducible promoter ( see the supplemental material ) . 
After induction with 50 ng/ml AHT , the luminescence activity of bacterial lysates ( Fig. 4D , top , gray bars ) and whole cells ( Fig. 4D , bottom , black bars ) was measured . 
In lysates from bacteria expressing full-length SipA together with InvB ( pWRG299 and pWRG300 ) , we measured high luminescence activity indicating split-Gluc complementation through chaperoneeffector interaction ( Fig. 4D ) . 
As expected , deletion of the SipA CBD in SipA48 -- 685 abrogated InvB binding , which resulted in signiﬁcantly reduced Gluc activity ( pWRG374 and pWRG375 ) ( Fig. 4D ) . 
By use of bacterial lysates , a 10-fold ( Q105-G106 ) or 13-fold ( G109-E110 ) decrease in signal could be measured with SipA lacking its CBD compared to full-length SipA ( Fig. 4D , top ) . 
Even with whole cells , a 2.3-fold ( G109-E110 ) or 4.8-fold 
FIG 1 Inﬂuence of substrate concentration on luminescence activity . 
( A ) Gluc was expressed from pBAD24-Gluc in S. Typhimurium WT , and ly-sates were prepared as described in Materials and Methods . 
Lysates were ﬁnally diluted 1:100 in assay buffer , and whole cells were collected in parallel . 
Different concentrations of native CTZ were added and luminescence activity was determined . 
( B ) Linear regression of data from lysates for the concentration range indicated . 
( C ) Linear regression of data from intact cells for the concentration range indicated . 
In panels B and C , a subset of the data from panel A is depicted . 
FIG 2 Expression of Gluc reporter fusions to the SPI-4 promoter quantiﬁed from bacterial lysates . 
( A ) Overnight cultures of the strains indicated were reinoculated 1:31 in fresh LB and grown under aeration for 6 h. Samples were collected every 30 min . 
A plasmid harboring a transcriptional fusion of Gluc to a fragment 5 = of siiA containing the putative SPI-4 promoter ( pWRG170 ) as well as a promoterless control ( pWRG169 ) were transferred in S. Typhimu-rium WT and the sirA-deﬁcient strain MvP896 . 
Lysates were prepared as described in Materials and Methods , diluted 1:10 , and normalized to OD600 . 
( B ) The siiA ORF was exchanged by Gluc within the chromosome in WT ( WRG34 ) and MvP896 ( sirA ) ( WRG84 ) . 
GlucM43I was used in a similar exchange experiment to generate WRG42 ( WT ) and WRG64 ( siiA ) . 
Luminescence activities in culture lysates were determined as described for panel A . 
The data are means standard deviations of three independent experiments done in triplicate . 
FIG 3 Gluc as marker to monitor type I secretion in S. Typhimurium . 
( A ) Gluc and GlucM43I were expressed from pBAD24-derived plasmids , and luminescence activities of whole cells ( black bars ) , supernatants ( open bars ) , and 1:10 - diluted lysates ( gray bars ) were determined . 
( B ) Various translational fusions of Gluc to the C-terminal moiety of SiiE were generated as indicated . 
The corresponding plasmid names are given in brackets . 
For construction details , refer to the supplemental material . 
( C ) The reporter gene fusions were expressed under the control of the siiA promoter in S. Typhimurium WT or the siiF strain deﬁcient in the SPI-4 T1SS . 
After 6 h of growth in LB , samples were collected and Gluc activity was quantiﬁed for whole cells , sterile-ﬁltered supernatants , and bacterial lysates . 
The data represent mean and standard deviation of three independent experiments done in triplicate . 
( Q105-G106 ) difference was observed ( Fig. 4D , bottom ) . 
To rule out the possibility that the differences measured are the result of lower expression levels of the SipA48 -- 685 fusion proteins , we used a polyclonal anti-Gluc antibody to detect the split-Gluc fusions in bacterial lysates by Western blotting . 
All SipA fusion proteins showed comparable expression levels ( see Fig . 
S5A in the supplemental material ) . 
To compare our approach to an established technique , we used a bacterial two-hybrid ( BacTH ) assay to show the interaction between InvB and SipA . 
BacTH is based on a PCA of fragments T18 and T25 derived from Bordetella pertussis CyaA ( 13 ) . 
Coexpression of the T25-InvB fusion protein together with SipA1 -- 685-T18 in E. coli BTH101 resulted in dark blue colonies ( see Fig . 
S5B in the supplemental material ) . 
This indicated efﬁcient CyaA fragment complementation through SipA1 -- 685-InvB interaction . 
If the SipA48 -- 685-T18 fusion protein was used instead , CyaA PCA was much less efﬁcient , as indicated by virtual absence of LacZ activity ( see Fig . 
S5B ) . 
This essentially conﬁrmed our results obtained with split Gluc . 
DISCUSSION
We conducted a comprehensive study to evaluate the usefulness of Gaussia princeps luciferase as a reporter in Salmonella enterica . 
Comparing the Gluc luminescence activity obtained from whole cells and cell lysates indicates that the Gram-negative envelope represents a diffusion barrier for coelenterazines . 
If Gluc was highly expressed in Salmonella , cell wall permeability of CTZ seems to be the limiting factor because luciferase activity reaches a constant plateau after 3 min ( see Fig . 
S1B in the supplemental material ) . 
Substrate accessibility of intracellular luciferases seems to be an issue in different organisms . 
When whole cells of the fungus C. albicans were compared to cell lysates in Rluc activity , signals were enhanced about 60-fold when lysates were used ( 5 ) . 
The extremely high enzymatic activity of Gluc compared to that of other luciferases enables the detection of genes with very low expression at their endogenous levels . 
When we used Gluc to report transcriptional activity of the siiA promoter , the lowest background activity was observed with Gluc integrated in a single copy within the Salmonella genome ( Fig. 2B ) . 
Care should be taken if Gluc is used in multicopy reporter plasmids , since signiﬁcant background activity occurred ( Fig. 2A ) . 
As an alternative to established transcriptional reporters , Gluc might be used as highly sensitive , fast option with comparably low costs . 
Recently , new Gluc variants were developed promising higher activity in combination with increased signal stability ( 19 , 29 ) . 
The GlucM43I mutant showed a higher and more glow-type light emission kinetics in Salmonella lysates ( see Fig . 
S3 in the supplemental material ) . 
We used this improved Gluc variant in fusion proteins together with domains of the SPI-4-encoded adhesin SiiE to quantify T1SS-dependent secretion . 
Previous results from the analysis of different SiiE deletion mutants with ELISA underscored the importance of the C-terminal part , including the complete Ig53 domain for secretion of the adhesin ( 28 ) . 
We addressed this question in a different way , deﬁning the SiiE C-terminal region including Ig53 to be essential and sufﬁcient for mediating T1S of a heterologous N-terminal domain ( Gluc ) . 
No T1SSdependent secretion of Gluc was detected if 15 N-terminal amino acids from SiiE Ig53 were deleted ( Fig. 4C ) . 
Interestingly , we observed an approximately 25-fold reduced secretion when Gluc was fused to Ig53 alone compared to Ig50-53 ( Fig. 4C ) . 
Recent results from studies with the type I secreted hemophore HasA of Serratia marcescens indicate that there is a role of linear sequence stretches within HasA in increasing secretion efﬁciency . 
The C-terminal secretion signal might play an important role in inducing ATP hydrolysis by the ABC protein , which subsequently leads to disassembly of the T1SS and release of the substrate ( 21 ) . 
Our results indicate an inﬂuence of domains located N terminally of Ig53 on the secretion efﬁciency of SiiE . 
The characterization of these signals has to be addressed in future experiments . 
Gluc-based secretion reporters might open a venue for the identiﬁcation and characterization of secreted proteins without stable periplasmic intermediates , which is a great advantage over alkaline phospha-tase ( PhoA ) - based secretion assays . 
In addition to type I , type III , type IV , and type VI secretion systems also feature structures bridging the periplasm ( 7 ) . 
Whether Gluc can be secreted via these systems has to be elucidated . 
To demonstrate that the split-Gluc method can be used in Sal-monella to detect protein-protein interactions , we have chosen the binding of the T3SS effector SipA to its cognate secretion chaperone InvB as an example ( 18 ) . 
With both published splitting sites ( Fig. 4B ) , we got a highly signiﬁcant , up-to-13-fold increase of luminescence activity with full-length SipA and InvB ( Fig. 4D ) . 
The two alternative split variants had both advantages and disadvantages . 
In our assay , the G109-E110 split variant ( 23 ) produced about 50 % higher signal with SipA1-685 and InvB in lysates ( Fig. 4D , top ) but led to a 3.8-fold increased background for SipA48-685 , which lacks the CBD , in whole cells ( Fig. 4D , bottom ) . 
Although InvB is a typical class I chaperone forming homodimers , the complex binds only one SipA effector molecule . 
Within this chaperone-effector complex , the CBD of SipA is bound by only one InvB protein ( 18 ) . 
With our approach , we can not determine whether there is an alternation between the two InvB monomers donating the Gluc N terminus or whether one InvB protein provides the Gluc part exclusively ( Fig. 4A ) . 
A unique feature of split Gluc is its reversible complementation , enabling investigation of dynamic and transient protein-protein interactions in vivo ( 15 , 23 ) . 
We could not demonstrate if Gluc reconstitution is reversible in Salmonella , because the interaction between SipA and InvB is thought to be stable upon binding of the chaperone-effector complex to the T3SS apparatus ( 18 ) . 
Further experiments should test whether dynamic interactions can be reproduced by split-Gluc complementation in Salmonella . 
Although C-terminal tagging of SipA and InvB was functional , other interaction partners might require N-terminal fusion of split Gluc portions for functionality . 
A future task is to develop a modular expression system allowing convenient cloning and simultaneous expression of two proteins fused to the N - and C-terminal parts of Gluc , respectively . 
In summary , with the split-Gluc approach we could obtain results comparable to those obtained by a bacterial two-hybrid assay based on Bordetella pertussis CyaA fragment complementation ( 13 ) ( see Fig . 
S5B in the supplemental material ) . 
Apart from this , split-Gluc PCA has several advantages . 
( i ) It does not require special reporter strains for analysis . 
( ii ) There is no change of endogenous cyclic AMP ( cAMP ) levels throughout the experiment . 
( iii ) Gluc complementation is very fast and can easily be quantiﬁed . 
( iv ) The split Gluc fragments are smaller and hence less likely to interfere with functions of the fusion partner . 
Therefore , this approach might be of particular interest for investigating protein-protein interactions in vivo in the natural host with small impact on general cellular functions . 
FIG 4 A split-Gluc protein complementation assay ( PCA ) for detection of chaperone-effector interaction . 
( A ) Schematic representation of the principle . 
The N terminus of GlucM43I was fused to the C terminus of the secretion chaperone InvB . 
The corresponding C-terminal portion of GlucM43I was fused to the cognate T3SS substrate SipA . 
Upon interaction via the N-terminal SipA chaperone binding site ( CBD ) , both Gluc parts reconstitute the functional enzyme , and light is emitted with the addition of coelenterazine ( CTZ ) . 
( B ) Two split-Gluc variants as depicted were generated and tested . 
( C ) InvB was fused to two N-terminal Gluc split variants , while SipA and a SipA variant lacking its CBD ( SipA48 -- 685 ) were both fused to the two variants of the C-terminal split-Gluc portions . 
( D ) All fusion constructs and the split-Gluc variants without fusion partner were transferred into S. Typhimurium , and expression was induced with 50 ng/ml AHT . 
Gluc activity was quantiﬁed from bacterial lysates ( top , gray bars ) and intact cells ( bottom , black bars ) . 
The gray line in the lower graphs represents the background luminescence measured with an empty vector control ( pWSK29 ) . 
Mean and standard deviation of one representative out of three independent experiments done in triplicate is shown . 
Statistical analysis by Student 's t test was done by comparing individual strains as depicted : , P 0.001 ; , P 0.01 ; , P 0.05 . 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Michael Hensel for providing strain MvP896 and critical reading of the manuscript and Sven Halbedel for help with the bacterial two-hybrid assay . 
This work was supported by an intramural research grant of the Rob-ert Koch-Institute to R.G.G. 
REFERENCES 
1 . 
Andreu N , et al. 2010 . 
Optimisation of bioluminescent reporters for use with mycobacteria . 
PLoS One 5 : e10777 . 
2 . 
Barnard E , McFerran NV , Nelson J , Timson DJ . 
2007 . 
Detection of protein-protein interactions using protein-fragment complementation assays ( PCA ) . 
Curr . 
Proteomics 4:17 -- 27 . 
3 . 
Ehrbar K , Hapfelmeier S , Stecher B , Hardt WD . 
2004 . 
InvB is required for type III-dependent secretion of SopA in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
186:1215 -- 1219 . 
4 . 
Elowitz MB . 
1999 . 
Transport , assembly , and dynamics in systems of interacting proteins . 
Dissertation . 
Princeton University , Princeton , NJ . 
5 . 
Enjalbert B , et al. 2009 . 
A multifunctional , synthetic Gaussia princeps luciferase reporter for live imaging of Candida albicans infections . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
77:4847 -- 4858 . 
6 . 
Gerlach RG , et al. 2008 . 
Cooperation of Salmonella pathogenicity islands 1 and 4 is required to breach epithelial barriers . 
Cell . 
Microbiol . 
10:2364 -- 2376 . 
7 . 
Gerlach RG , Hensel M. 2007 . 
Protein secretion systems and adhesins : the molecular armory of Gram-negative pathogens . 
Int . 
J. Med . 
Microbiol . 
297:401 -- 415 . 
8 . 
Gerlach RG , Hensel M. 2007 . 
Salmonella pathogenicity islands in host speciﬁcity , host pathogen-interactions and antibiotics resistance of Salmonella enterica . 
Berl . 
Munch . 
Tierarztl . 
Wochenschr . 
120 : 317 -- 327 . 
9 . 
Gerlach RG , Hölzer SU , Jäckel D , Hensel M. 2007 . 
Rapid engineering of bacterial reporter gene fusions by using red recombination . 
Appl . 
Environ . 
Microbiol . 
73:4234 -- 4242 . 
10 . 
Gerlach RG , Jäckel D , Geymeier N , Hensel M. 2007 . 
Salmonella patho-genicity island 4-mediated adhesion is coregulated with invasion genes in Salmonella enterica . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
75:4697 -- 4709 . 
11 . 
Gerlach RG , et al. 2007 . 
Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 4 encodes a giant non-ﬁmbrial adhesin and the cognate type 1 secretion system . 
Cell . 
Microbiol . 
9:1834 -- 1850 . 
12 . 
Inouye S , Sahara Y. 2008 . 
Identiﬁcation of two catalytic domains in a luciferase secreted by the copepod Gaussia princeps . 
Biochem . 
Biophys . 
Res . 
Commun . 
365:96 -- 101 . 
13 . 
Karimova G , Pidoux J , Ullmann A , Ladant D. 1998 . 
A bacterial two-hybrid system based on a reconstituted signal transduction pathway . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
U. S. A. 95:5752 -- 5756 . 
14 . 
Karimova G , Ullmann A , Ladant D. 2000 . 
A bacterial two-hybrid system that exploits a cAMP signaling cascade in Escherichia coli . 
Methods Enzymol . 
328:59 -- 73 . 
15 . 
Kim SB , Sato M , Tao H. 2009 . 
Split Gaussia luciferase-based bioluminescence template for tracing protein dynamics in living cells . 
Anal . 
Chem . 
81:67 -- 74 . 
16 . 
Lane MC , Alteri CJ , Smith SN , Mobley HL . 
2007 . 
Expression of ﬂagella is coincident with uropathogenic Escherichia coli ascension to the upper urinary tract . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
U. S. A. 104:16669 -- 16674 . 
17 . 
Lee SH , Galán JE . 
2003 . 
InvB is a type III secretion-associated chaperone for the Salmonella enterica effector protein SopE . 
J. Bacteriol . 
185 : 7279 -- 7284 . 
18 . 
Lilic M , Vujanac M , Stebbins CE . 
2006 . 
A common structural motif in the binding of virulence factors to bacterial secretion chaperones . 
Mol . 
Cell 21:653 -- 664 . 
19 . 
Maguire CA , et al. 2009 . 
Gaussia luciferase variant for high-throughput functional screening applications . 
Anal . 
Chem . 
81:7102 -- 7106 . 
20 . 
Main-Hester KL , Colpitts KM , Thomas GA , Fang FC , Libby SJ . 
2008 . 
Coordinate regulation of Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 ( SPI1 ) and SPI4 in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
76 : 1024 -- 1035 . 
21 . 
Masi M , Wandersman C. 2010 . 
Multiple signals direct the assembly and function of a type 1 secretion system . 
J. Bacteriol . 
192:3861 -- 3869 . 
22 . 
Rathnayaka T , Tawa M , Sohya S , Yohda M , Kuroda Y. 2010 . 
Biophysical characterization of highly active recombinant Gaussia luciferase expressed in Escherichia coli . 
Biochim . 
Biophys . 
Acta 1804:1902 -- 1907 . 
23 . 
Remy I , Michnick SW . 
2006 . 
A highly sensitive protein-protein interaction assay based on Gaussia luciferase . 
Nat . 
Methods 3:977 -- 979 . 
24 . 
Shao N , Bock R. 2008 . 
A codon-optimized luciferase from Gaussia princeps facilitates the in vivo monitoring of gene expression in the model alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii . 
Curr . 
Genet . 
53:381 -- 388 . 
25 . 
Tannous BA . 
2009 . 
Gaussia luciferase reporter assay for monitoring biological processes in culture and in vivo . 
Nat . 
Protoc . 
4:582 -- 591 . 
26 . 
Tannous BA , Kim DE , Fernandez JL , Weissleder R , Breakeﬁeld XO . 
2005 . 
Codon-optimized Gaussia luciferase cDNA for mammalian gene expression in culture and in vivo . 
Mol . 
Ther . 
11:435 -- 443 . 
27 . 
Verhaegent M , Christopoulos TK . 
2002 . 
Recombinant Gaussia lucifer ¬ 
ase . 
Overexpression , puriﬁcation , and analytical application of a bioluminescent reporter for DNA hybridization . 
Anal . 
Chem . 
74:4378 -- 4385 . 
28 . 
Wagner C , et al. 2011 . 
Functional dissection of SiiE , a giant non-ﬁmbrial adhesin of Salmonella enterica . 
Cell . 
Microbiol . 
13:1286 -- 1301 . 
29 . 
Welsh JP , Patel KG , Manthiram K , Swartz JR. 2009 . 
Multiply mutated Gaussia luciferases provide prolonged and intense bioluminescence . 
Biochem . 
Biophys . 
Res . 
Commun . 
389:563 -- 568 . 
30 . 
Wiles S , Ferguson K , Stefanidou M , Young DB , Robertson BD . 
2005 . 
Alternative luciferase for monitoring bacterial cells under adverse conditions . 
Appl . 
Environ . 
Microbiol . 
71:3427 -- 3432 . 
31 . 
Wurdinger T , et al. 2008 . 
A secreted luciferase for ex-vivo monitoring of in vivo processes . 
Nat . 
Methods 5:171 -- 173 . 
32 . 
Xu X , Hensel M. 2010 . 
Systematic analysis of the SsrAB virulon of Sal-monella enterica . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
78:49 -- 58 .