Section of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06536
Unlike broad-host Salmonella serovars , which cause self-limiting disease , Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi can infect only humans causing typhoid fever , a life-threatening systemic disease . 
The molecular bases for these differences are presently unknown . 
Here we show that the GTPase Rab29 ( Rab7L1 ) distinguishes the intracellular vacu-ole of human-adapted and broad-host Salmonella serovars . 
A screen to identify host factors required for the export of typhoid toxin , which is exclusively encoded by the human-speciﬁc Salmonella enterica serovars Typhi ( S. Typhi ) and Paratyphi ( S. Paratyphi ) identiﬁed Rab29 . 
We found that Rab29 is recruited to the S. Typhi-containing vacuole but not to vacuoles containing broad-host Salmonella . 
We observed that in cells infected with broad-host Salmonella Rab29 is speciﬁcally cleaved by the proteolytic activity of GtgE , a unique type III secretion effector protein that is absent from S. Typhi . 
An S. Typhi strain engineered to express GtgE and therefore able to cleave Rab29 exhibited increased intracellular replication in human macrophages . 
These ﬁndings indicate significant differences in the intracellular biology of human-adapted and broad-host Salmonella and show how subtle differences in the assortment of effector proteins encoded by highly related patho-gens can have a major impact in their biology . 
Edited by Scott J. Hultgren, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, and approved October 5, 2011 (received for review July 21, 2011)
An intracellular pathogen , Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi ( S. Typhi ) causes typhoid fever and is a serious global health concern that results in > 200,000 annual deaths , mostly in developing countries ( 1 , 2 ) . 
S. Typhi and the related serovar Salmo-nella Paratyphi can infect only humans , resulting in life-threatening systemic disease ( i.e. , `` typhoid fever '' ) . 
In addition , S. Typhi can cause life-long persistent infection in convalescent individuals ( 3 ) . 
These features are in sharp contrast to most other S. enterica serovars such as Salmonella Typhimurium ( S. Typhimurium ) and Salmonella Enteritidis ( S. Enteritidis ) . 
which can infect a variety of hosts and are usually associated with self-limiting gastroenteritis ( i.e. , `` food poisoning '' ) ( 4 ) . 
The molecular bases for S. Typhi 's unique pathogenic attributes are unknown although they are believed to be the result of a combination of genome degradation and the acquisition of new genetic information ( 5 ) . 
It is also unknown whether the genetic differences between human-adapted and broad-host range Salmonellae may result in speciﬁc differences in the intracellular biology of these pathogens . 
One of the few unique virulence factors of the human-adapted S. enterica serovars Typhi and Paratyphi is typhoid toxin ( 6 -- 8 ) , an AB toxin with DNase and ADP-ribosyl transferase activities . 
A distinguishing feature of this toxin is that it is produced only once S. Typhi reaches an intracellular location ( 7 ) , and it is subsequently transported to the extracellular environment by a unique transport mechanism that involves vesicular transport intermediates ( 6 ) . 
In an attempt to identify potentially unique properties of S. Typhi 's intracellular biology , we sought to identify host cell factors that are necessary for the formation of the typhoid toxin transport intermediates . 
We show here that one of these factors , the Rab GTPase Rab29 , is recruited to the S. Typhi-containing vacuole but not to the vacuole containing broad-host Salmonella serovars . 
We found that absence of recruitment of Rab29 to broad-host Salmonellacontaining vacuoles is due to the speciﬁc cleavage of this GTPase by a unique type III secretion effector protein , which is absent in S. Typhi and S. Paratyphi . 
These results demonstrate that there are signiﬁcant differences between the intracellular biology of human-adapted and broad-host range S. enterica serovars that could help explain differences in their pathogenic properties . 
In addition , our results showed that small differences in the battery of effectors delivered by virtually identical type III secretion systems can result in marked differences in the biology of highly related pathogens . 
Results
Identiﬁcation of Rab GTPases involved in the formation of typhoid toxin transport intermediates . 
We have previously shown that typhoid toxin is produced exclusively within host cells and that it is then transported to the extracellular environment by vesicular transport intermediates that can be visualized as puncta following immunoﬂuorescence staining of the toxin ( 6 ) . 
We sought to identify host cell factors necessary for the formation of these transport intermediates as a strategy to potentially identify unique features of the intracellular biology of S. Typhi . 
We speciﬁcally focused on Rab-family GTPases given their demonstrated role in vesicle trafﬁcking ( 9 , 10 ) . 
We performed a siRNA screen targeting each of the human Rab and Rab-like GTPases ( SI Appendix , Table S1 ) and found that depletion of Rab7 , Rab29 ( also known as Rab7L1 ) , and Rab40B resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction of the amount of typhoid toxin transport intermediates ( Fig. 1 A and B and SI Appendix , Fig . 
S1 ) . 
Most likely , this reduction is not due to reduced bacterial entry because the levels of bacterial internalization in cells depleted of Rab7 , Rab29 , or Rab40B were equivalent to those of control cells ( Fig. 1C ) . 
However , depletion of Rab7 resulted in a marked decrease in the levels of S. Typhi intracellular replication ( Fig. 1D ) , consistent with the previous observation that this GTPase is required for proper intracellular trafﬁcking of S. Typhimurium ( 11 ) . 
Therefore , the decrease of intracellular typhoid toxin puncta in cells depleted of Rab7 may be due to the reduced number of intracellular bacteria . 
In contrast , depletion of Rab29 or Rab40B in epithelial cells did not alter the levels of S. Typhi intracellular replication ( Fig. 1D ) or the levels of toxin production ( SI Appendix , Fig . 
S1 ) , suggesting a more speciﬁc role for Rab29 and Rab40B in toxin transport . 
Very little information is available on Rab29 and Rab40B . 
Rab29 is related to Rab32 and Rab38 ( SI Appendix , Fig . 
S2 ) , which are involved in the transport of melanocytic enzymes from the Golgi apparatus to the melanosomes ( 12 ) . 
Rab40B , along with its close homologs Rab40A and Rab40C , forms an independent subgroup of Rab 
Author contributions : S.S. and J.E.G. designed research ; S.S. and X.L. performed research ; S.S. , X.L. , and J.E.G. analyzed data ; and S.S. , X.L. , and J.E.G. wrote the paper . 
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: jorge.galan@yale.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10 . 
1073/pnas .1111959108 / - / DCSupplemental . 
GTPases ( SI Appendix , Fig . 
S2 ) . 
We found that Rab29 colocalizes with the Golgi marker GM130 ( SI Appendix , Fig . 
S3 ) . 
Live imaging showed that Rab29 localizes not only to the Golgi complex , but also along lengthy and dynamic tubules emerging from and retracting to the Golgi complex ( Fig. 1E ) ( Movie S1 ) . 
In contrast , Rab40B was found enriched at the nuclear envelope and in some punctate structures in the perinuclear area ( SI Appendix , Fig . 
S3 ) . 
Rab29 is recruited to the S. Typhi-containing vacuole but not to vacuoles containing broad-host S. enterica serovars . 
We examined the localization of Rab40B and Rab29 in cultured cells infected with S. Typhi . 
We found that Rab40B was not recruited to the S. Typhi-containing vacuole and that its overall distribution throughout the cell was not altered by the bacterial infection ( SI Appendix , Fig . 
S4 ) . 
These observations suggest that this GTPase may affect the formation of toxin carriers indirectly and not by acting on the bacteria-containing vacuole . 
In contrast , Rab29 was efﬁciently recruited to the S. Typhi-containing vacuole ∼ 90 -- 120 min after bacterial internalization , with maximum recruitment ∼ 3 h after infection ( Fig. 2 A and B , SI Appendix , Fig . 
S5 , and Movies S2 and S3 ) , and remained associated with the bacteria-containing vacuole for several hours postrecruitment ( Fig. 2B ) . 
Time-lapse video microscopy also showed highly dynamic tubules containing Rab29 connecting the Golgi apparatus and the bacterial vacuole as well as emerging from the vacuole toward the cell periphery ( Fig. 2C and Movies S3 and S4 ) . 
Recruitment of Rab29 to the S. Typhi vacuole was also observed in macrophages ( SI Appendix , Fig . 
S6 ) . 
The localization of Rab29 to the vacuole coincided with the time frame in which typhoid toxin puncta are observed after bacterial infection ( 6 ) . 
We then examined whether there were differences between the recruitment of Rab29 to the S. Typhi and the S. Typhimuriumcontaining vacuoles . 
In sharp contrast with S. Typhi , we found that 
Rab29 was not detected in S. Typhimurium vacuoles in epithelial cells ( Fig. 2 B and D and SI Appendix , Fig . 
S5 ) or macrophages ( SI Appendix , Fig . 
S6 ) . 
These observations were not due to peculiarities of the speciﬁc isolates used in this study because we found similar phenotypes in several isolates of S. Typhi and S. Typhi-murium ( SI Appendix , Fig . 
S7 ) . 
We also found efﬁcient recruitment of Rab29 to the human-adapted serovar S. Paratyphi vacuoles but not to the vacuoles containing the broad-host range S. Enteritidis or Salmonella Dublin serovars ( Fig. 2E ) . 
These ﬁndings are remarkable because this is a unique report of a host cell determinant that distinguishes the intracellular compartments containing human-adapted S. enterica serovars ( i.e. , S. Typhi and S. Paratyphi ) from those containing broad-host range serovars ( e.g. , S. Typhimurium and S. Enteritidis ) . 
Furthermore , given the central role of Rab-family GTPases in vesicle trafﬁcking ( 9 , 10 ) , it is expected that the presence or absence of Rab29 must translate into signiﬁcant differences in the composition and properties of the bacteria-containing vacuoles . 
Differential recruitment of Rab29 to the S. Typhi - and S. Typhimuriumcontaining vacuoles is dependent on the SPI-1 T3SS effector protein GtgE . 
We further investigated the basis for the observed differences in the recruitment of Rab29 among S. enterica serovars . 
Because the interaction of all S. enterica serovars with host cells is largely mediated by type III secretion systems ( T3SSs ) encoded within its pathogenicity islands 1 ( SPI-1 ) and 2 ( SPI-2 ) ( 13 -- 15 ) , we investigated the potential involvement of these systems in the recruitment of Rab29 . 
However , we found that mutants defective in these systems were fully competent in the recruitment of Rab29 to the S. Typhi-containing vacuole ( SI Appendix , Fig . 
S8 ) . 
We therefore explored the possibility that S. Typhimurium may encode a factor ( missing from S. Typhi ) that would actively prevent the recruitment of Rab29 to its vacuole . 
To test this hypothesis , we coinfected cultured cells expressing CFP-Rab29 with S. Typhi expressing the uorescent protein mCherry ( S. TyphimCherry ﬂ ) , and S. Typhimurium expressing the uorescent protein GFP and ex-ﬂ amined the ability of S. Typhi to recruit Rab29 . 
We found that , in contrast to controls ( i.e. , cells infected just with S. Typhi ) , most of the S. TyphimCherry-containing vacuoles in cells coinfected with S. Typhimurium lacked Rab29 ( Fig. 3A ) . 
In addition , we found that in cells preinfected with S. Typhimurium and reinfected 4 h after the rst infection with S. TyphimCherry , very few S. Typhimcherry ﬁ - con-taining vacuoles were decorated with Rab29 ( 5.4 % ) ( Fig. 3B ) . 
In contrast , we found a much higher percentage ( 49.4 % ) of the S. Typhimcherry-containing vacuoles with Rab29 in cells preinfected with S. Typhi . 
S. Typhimuriummcherry was not able to recruit Rab29 in cells preinfected with either S. Typhi or S. Typhimurium ( Fig. 3B ) . 
These results indicate that a S. Typhimurium factor ( s ) acting in trans can prevent the localization of Rab29 to the bacteria-con-taining vacuole . 
We investigated whether the factor ( s ) preventing Rab29 localization to the S. Typhimurium vacuole was an effector of one of its two T3SSs . 
As in wild type , we found that the S. Typhimurium ΔspiA mutant ( defective in its SPI-2 T3SS ) did not recruit Rab29 ( Fig. 3 C and D ) , indicating that the factor ( s ) that prevents the localization of this GTPase to the bacteria-containing vacuole is not an effector of the SPI-2 T3SS . 
However , the S. Typhimurium 
ΔinvA mutant ( defective in the SPI-1 T3SS ) internalized by Invasin effectively recruited Rab29 to its vacuole ( Fig. 3 C and D ) . 
This result indicates that an effector ( s ) delivered through the SPI-1 T3SS is responsible for preventing Rab29 localization to the wildtype S. Typhimurium vacuole . 
To identify this effector ( s ) we ﬁrst used a S. Typhimurium strain lacking all known SPI-1 T3SS effector proteins ( i.e. , ΔsopE , ΔsopE2 , ΔsopB , ΔsptP , ΔsopA , ΔsipA , ΔavrA , ΔsopD , ΔsopD2 , and ΔslrP ) . 
This strain is noninvasive because it lacks the effector proteins that mediate bacterial entry ( i.e. , SopE , SopE2 , and SopB ) ( 16 ) . 
However , unlike the ΔinvA mutant , the effectorless mutant strain is type III secretion and translocation competent ( 17 ) . 
Surprisingly , when internalized via the Invasin protein , the S. Typhimurium effectorless mutant strain did not recruit Rab29 to its vacuole ( Fig. 3 C and D ) . 
In addition , the S. Typhimurium effectorless strain without the Invasin plasmid , and therefore noninvasive but still able to attach to target cells and translocate effectors , was able to inhibit the recruitment of Rab29 to the S. TyphimCherry vacuole ( Fig. 3 E and F ) . 
These results indicated that the activity of a yet unidentiﬁed SPI-1 T3SS effector ( s ) inhibits the recruitment of Rab29 to the S. Typhimurium-containing vacuole and that this putative effector can exert its function even when delivered by extracellularly localized bacteria . 
To identify this effector , we examined by liquid chromatography ( LC ) - MS/MS the culture supernatants of a strain lacking all known SPI-1 T3SS effectors for the presence of previously unidentiﬁed putative SPI-1 T3SS effector proteins . 
This analysis detected the presence of the needle complex inner rod protein PrgJ ( 18 ) ; the needle complex assembly regulatory protein InvJ ( 19 ) ; and the T3SS effectors PipA , GogA , GtgA ( 20 ) , and PipB2 ( 21 ) ( SI Appendix , Fig . 
S9 ) . 
However , deletion of the genes encoding these effectors did not result in the presence of Rab29 in the S. Typhi-murium-containing vacuole ( Fig. 4A ) . 
Our LC-MS/MS analysis also detected GtgE ( 22 ) ( SI Appendix , Fig . 
S9 ) , which is encoded on the Gifsy-2 bacteriophage of S. Typhimurium and other broadhost range serovars ( 23 , 24 ) , but , intriguingly , it is absent from the human-adapted S. Typhi and S. Paratyphi serovars . 
Although GtgE has not been demonstrated to be a T3SS effector protein , a bioinformatics tool ( 25 ) predicts the presence of a putative T3SS signal at its amino terminus . 
Consistent with this observation , we found that GtgE is secreted to culture supernatants in a SPI-1 T3SSdependent manner ( SI Appendix , Fig . 
S10 ) . 
We therefore examined its potential involvement in the prevention of Rab29 recruitment to the S. Typhimurium vacuole . 
We found that a ΔgtgE S. Typhimu-rium mutant strain recruited Rab29 to its vacuole ( Fig. 4 B and C ) . 
Furthermore , expression of gtgE in S. Typhi prevented recruitment of Rab29 to its vacuole ( Fig. 4 D and E ) . 
These results indicate that GtgE is the SPI-1 T3SS effector protein whose activity prevents the recruitment of Rab29 to the Salmonella-containing vacuole . 
GtgE is a protease that directly cleaves Rab29 . 
During these studies we observed that , in comparison with cells infected with S. Typhi , the overall strength of the ﬂuorescent signal of CFP-Rab29 was markedly reduced in cells infected with S. Typhimurium ( Fig. 5A ) . 
In contrast , the reduction in CFP-Rab29 ﬂuorescence was not observed in cells infected with the ΔgtgE S. Typhimurium mutant ( Fig. 5A ) . 
We therefore examined the levels of Rab29 in cells infected with either S. Typhi or S. Typhimurium . 
We found that the levels of full-length Rab29 were markedly reduced in S. Typhimu-rium-infected cells compared with its levels in uninfected or S. Typhi-infected cells ( Fig. 5B ) . 
Furthermore , a smaller molecular weight fragment of CFP-Rab29 , presumably the result of its proteolytic cleavage , was detected in S. Typhimurium-infected cells but not in S. Typhi-infected or control uninfected cells ( Fig. 5B ) . 
Cleavage of Rab29 in S. Typhimurium-infected cells was not prevented by the addition of a proteasome inhibitor ( SI Appendix , 
GtgE in uences the ability of Salmonella to replicate within ﬂ macrophages . 
Previous studies have shown that GtgE is required for S. Typhimurium virulence in an animal model of infection ( 22 ) . 
This observation prompted us to investigate the potential inﬂuence of the presence of this effector in the ability of S. Typhi to replicate within macrophages . 
We found that the S. Typhi strain encoding wild-type GtgE replicated signi cantly better that the ﬁ strains encoding the mutant effector ( Fig. 6G ) . 
These results are consistent with the hypothesis that the removal of Rab29 from the Salmonella-containing vacuole results in an environment that is more favorable for Salmonella growth . 
Furthermore , consistent with the involvement of Rab29 in typhoid toxin transport , S. Typhi expressing wild-type GtgE exhibited decreased efﬁciency in the formation of the typhoid toxin transport intermediates ( SI Appendix , Fig . 
S16 ) . 
Discussion
The molecular bases for the different pathogenic properties of human-adapted and broad-host Salmonellae are presently unknown . 
A screen to identify host factors required for the export of typhoid toxin , which is exclusively encoded by the human-speciﬁc S. enterica serovars S. Typhi and S. Paratyphi , identiﬁed Rab40B and Rab29 . 
Although the localization of Rab40B did not change upon bacterial infection , we found that Rab29 was effectively recruited to the S. Typhi and S. Paratyphi-containing vacuoles . 
However , we found that Rab29 was not recruited to vacuoles containing broad-host range S. enterica serovars such as S. Typhimurium and S. Enteritidis . 
We also found that the absence of Rab29 from the vacuole of broad-host Salmonellae is due to its speciﬁc cleavage by GtgE , a type III secreted effector protein absent from the human-adapted S. Typhi and S. Para-typhi serovars . 
The protease activity of GtgE appears to have rather narrow target speciﬁcity because it did not cleave the related GTPases Rab40B , Rab5 , and Rab7 . 
In this regard , the narrow speciﬁcity of a bacterially encoded protease is reminiscent of other bacterially encoded virulence factors such as teta-nus and botulinum toxins , which target speciﬁc components of the synaptic vesicle ( 28 ) . 
Although nothing is known about the biology of Rab29 , it is expected that the presence or absence of this GTPase on Salmonella-containing vacuoles should signi-ﬁ cantly change the properties of these compartments given the role that Rab-family GTPases in general are known to play in regulating vesicle trafﬁcking . 
Our intriguing observation that Rab29 localizes to dynamic areas of the Golgi apparatus and within tubes emanating from the S. Typhi-containing vacuole toward the cell periphery suggests the potential involvement of these structures in typhoid toxin transport . 
However , given the lack of knowledge on the biology of Rab29 , more experiments will be required to clarify the speciﬁc role of this GTPase in toxin transport . 
It is not clear how the speciﬁc targeting of Rab29 beneﬁts Salmonella pathogenesis . 
Because deletion of gtgE results in a very signiﬁcant virulence reduction in a mouse model of infection ( 22 ) , removal of Rab29 from infected cells should be advantageous for the pathogenesis of S. Typhimurium . 
However , although GtgE appears to have narrow substrate speciﬁcity , it is possible that GtgE may target other Rab GTPases so additional experiments on the speciﬁcity of this protease will be required to clarify its role in virulence . 
Interestingly , expression of GtgE in 
1 . 
Pang T , Levine MM , Ivanoff B , Wain J , Finlay BB ( 1998 ) Typhoid fever -- important issues still remain . 
Trends Microbiol 6:131 -- 133 . 
2 . 
Crump JA , Mintz ED ( 2010 ) Global trends in typhoid and paratyphoid fever . 
Clin Infect Dis 50:241 -- 246 . 
3 . 
Parry CM , Hien TT , Dougan G , White NJ , Farrar JJ ( 2002 ) Typhoid fever . 
N Engl J Med 347:1770 -- 1782 . 
4 . 
Hohmann EL ( 2001 ) Nontyphoidal salmonellosis . 
Clin Infect Dis 32:263 -- 269 . 
5 . 
Sabbagh SC , Forest CG , Lepage C , Leclerc JM , Daigle F ( 2010 ) So similar , yet so different : Uncovering distinctive features in the genomes of Salmonella enterica sero-vars Typhimurium and Typhi . 
FEMS Microbiol Lett 305:1 -- 13 . 
6 . 
Spanò S , Ugalde JE , Galán JE ( 2008 ) Delivery of a Salmonella Typhi exotoxin from a host intracellular compartment . 
Cell Host Microbe 3:30 -- 38 . 
7 . 
Haghjoo E , Galán JE ( 2004 ) Salmonella typhi encodes a functional cytolethal distending toxin that is delivered into host cells by a bacterial-internalization pathway . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:4614 -- 4619 . 
8 . 
Song J , et al. ( 2010 ) A mouse model for the human pathogen Salmonella typhi . 
Cell Host Microbe 8:369 -- 376 . 
9 . 
Brighouse A , Dacks JB , Field MC ( 2010 ) Rab protein evolution and the history of the eukaryotic endomembrane system . 
Cell Mol Life Sci 67:3449 -- 3465 . 
10 . 
Stenmark H ( 2009 ) Rab GTPases as coordinators of vesicle trafﬁc . 
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10:513 -- 525 . 
11 . 
Méresse S , Steele-Mortimer O , Finlay BB , Gorvel JP ( 1999 ) The rab7 GTPase controls the maturation of Salmonella typhimurium-containing vacuoles in HeLa cells . 
EMBO J 18:4394 -- 4403 . 
12 . 
Wasmeier C , et al. ( 2006 ) Rab38 and Rab32 control post-Golgi trafﬁcking of mela-nogenic enzymes . 
J Cell Biol 175:271 -- 281 . 
13 . 
Galán JE ( 2001 ) Salmonella interactions with host cells : Type III secretion at work . 
Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 17:53 -- 86 . 
14 . 
Waterman SR , Holden DW ( 2003 ) Functions and effectors of the Salmonella patho-genicity island 2 type III secretion system . 
Cell Microbiol 5:501 -- 511 . 
15 . 
Ibarra JA , Steele-Mortimer O ( 2009 ) Salmonella -- the ultimate insider . 
Salmonella virulence factors that modulate intracellular survival . 
Cell Microbiol 11:1579 -- 1586 . 
16 . 
Zhou D , Chen LM , Hernandez L , Shears SB , Galán JE ( 2001 ) A Salmonella inositol polyphosphatase acts in conjunction with other bacterial effectors to promote host cell actin cytoskeleton rearrangements and bacterial internalization . 
Mol Microbiol 39:248 -- 259 . 
17 . 
Hernandez LD , Pypaert M , Flavell RA , Galán JE ( 2003 ) A Salmonella protein causes macrophage cell death by inducing autophagy . 
J Cell Biol 163:1123 -- 1131 . 
S. Typhi resulted in increased growth within cultured macro-phages ( although not within epithelial cells ) , indicating that the activity of this effector favors intracellular growth . 
Unlike S. Typhimurium a critical feature of S. Typhi is its ability to cause persistent infection . 
It is therefore possible that slowing down intracellular growth by recruiting Rab29 may be beneﬁcial for the establishment of persistent infection because slower replication may be necessary to avoid immune detection . 
Overall this study revealed signiﬁcant differences between the intracellular compartments of human-adapted and broad-host S. enterica serovars , which may have implications for the understanding of the rather marked differences between the biology of these different Salmonella serovars . 
In addition , our results indicate a remarkable ﬁne-tuning of the activity of T3SSs to adapt their function to the unique requirements of each S. enterica serovar because differences in a single type III secretion effector protein result in fundamental changes in Sal-monella 's intracellular niche . 
Materials and Methods
Detailed information about experimental procedures and strains can be found in SI Appendix , Materials and Methods . 
Wild-type S. enterica strains have been described previously ( 29 , 30 ) . 
Mutants were constructed and bacterial infections were carried out as previously described ( 31 ) . 
Live-cell imaging was performed at 37 °C in a temperature , humidity , and CO2 controlled live chamber ( Pathology Devices ) , using a 60 × oil objective ( numerical aperture , 1.4 ) of an Improvision spinning disk confocal microscope equipped with a Nikon TE2000 . 
The FLAG ﬂuorescence associated with puncta ( not associated with bacteria ) was quantiﬁed by using a purpose-built macro developed in the open source software ImageJ ( http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/ ) . 
Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out as previously described ( 32 ) . 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . 
We thank members of the J.E.G. laboratory for careful review of this manuscript . 
We also thank Massimiliano Baldassarre for help in writing the ImageJ macro for image quantiﬁcation . 
This work was supported by National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Grants AI079022 , AI070949 , and AI055472 ( to J.E.G. ) . 
18 . 
Marlovits TC , et al. ( 2006 ) Assembly of the inner rod determines needle length in the type III secretion injectisome . 
Nature 441:637 -- 640 . 
19 . 
Kubori T , Sukhan A , Aizawa SI , Galán JE ( 2000 ) Molecular characterization and assembly of the needle complex of the Salmonella typhimurium type III protein secretion system . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:10225 -- 10230 . 
20 . 
Wood MW , et al. ( 1998 ) Identiﬁcation of a pathogenicity island required for Salmo-nella enteropathogenicity . 
Mol Microbiol 29:883 -- 891 . 
21 . 
Knodler LA , et al. ( 2003 ) Salmonella type III effectors PipB and PipB2 are targeted to detergent-resistant microdomains on internal host cell membranes . 
Mol Microbiol 49 : 685 -- 704 . 
22 . 
Ho TD , et al. ( 2002 ) Identiﬁcation of GtgE , a novel virulence factor encoded on the Gifsy-2 bacteriophage of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium . 
J Bacteriol 184 : 5234 -- 5239 . 
23 . 
McClelland M , et al. ( 2004 ) Comparison of genome degradation in Paratyphi A and Typhi , human-restricted serovars of Salmonella enterica that cause typhoid . 
Nat Genet 36:1268 -- 1274 . 
24 . 
Parkhill J , et al. ( 2001 ) Complete genome sequence of a multiple drug resistant Sal-monella enterica serovar Typhi CT18 . 
Nature 413:848 -- 852 . 
25 . 
Buchko GW , et al. ( 2010 ) A multi-pronged search for a common structural motif in the secretion signal of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium type III effector proteins . 
Mol Biosyst 6:2448 -- 2458 . 
26 . 
Ostermeier C , Brunger AT ( 1999 ) Structural basis of Rab effector speciﬁcity : crystal structure of the small G protein Rab3A complexed with the effector domain of rabphilin-3A . 
Cell 96:363 -- 374 . 
27 . 
Lee MT , Mishra A , Lambright DG ( 2009 ) Structural mechanisms for regulation of membrane trafﬁc by rab GTPases . 
Trafﬁc 10:1377 -- 1389 . 
28 . 
Montecucco C , Schiavo G ( 1993 ) Tetanus and botulism neurotoxins : A new group of zinc proteases . 
Trends Biochem Sci 18:324 -- 327 . 
29 . 
Galán JE , Curtiss R , 3rd ( 1991 ) Distribution of the invA , - B , - C , and - D genes of Sal-monella typhimurium among other Salmonella serovars : invA mutants of Salmonella typhi are deﬁcient for entry into mammalian cells . 
Infect Immun 59:2901 -- 2908 . 
30 . 
Hoiseth SK , Stocker BA ( 1981 ) Aromatic-dependent Salmonella typhimurium are nonvirulent and effective as live vaccines . 
Nature 291:238 -- 239 . 
31 . 
Kaniga K , Bossio JC , Galán JE ( 1994 ) The Salmonella typhimurium invasion genes invF and invG encode homologues of the AraC and PulD family of proteins . 
Mol Microbiol 13:555 -- 568 . 
32 . 
Lara-Tejero M , Kato J , Wagner S , Liu X , Galán JE ( 2011 ) A sorting platform determines the order of protein secretion in bacterial type III systems . 
Science 331:1188 -- 1191 .