Minimization of Salmonella
Abstract 
Many reviews have discussed Salmonella in poultry and suggested best practices to minimize this organism on raw poultry meat . 
Despite years of research and conscientious control efforts by industry and regulatory agencies , human salmonellosis rates have declined only modestly and Salmonella is still found on raw poultry . 
Expert committees have repeatedly emphasized the importance of controlling risk , but information about Salmonella in poultry is often limited to prevalence , with inadequate information about testing methods or strains of Salmonella that are detected by these methods and no information about any impact on the degree of risk . 
This review examines some assumptions behind the discussion of Salmonella in poultry : the relationships between sampling and cultural methodology , prevalence and numbers of cells , and the implications of serotype and subtype issues . 
Minimizing Salmonella contamination of poultry is not likely to reduce human salmonellosis acquired from exposure to contaminated chicken until these issues are confronted more systematically . 
10:5
INTRODUCTION
Many reviews on the topic of minimizing Salmonella on raw poultry are not much more than exhortatory lists of best practices in which greater levels of effort and vigilance are urged in the application of remarkably similar recommendations . 
Such papers have been available for 40 years , with presentations on this topic a regular feature of poultry meetings during that time . 
Many of these reviews have been useful for thinking about the Salmonella problem and possible interventions , but we doubt that we can do a signiﬁcantly better job of writing such a review than has already been done by many of our colleagues . 
The drawback of best practices lists is that they address Salmonella contamination in a general way that may be more effective over the long-term , but they do not assure consistent Salmonella control for every ﬂock that is produced . 
In particular , continued Salmonella problems are seen in parent and grandparent ﬂocks , which are more valuable and thus receive more conscientious and consistent levels of best-practice care than do ﬂocks of production birds . 
If ﬁve years from now , control efforts in production ﬂocks are at the same level as those devoted to breeder ﬂocks today , there will still be Salmonella-positive ﬂocks , even though all of them will have received an improved standard of care . 
It is also likely that public and regulatory standards will be more demanding , whatever degree of success the worldwide poultry industry may have in reducing Salmonella contamination in its products relative to today . 
The purpose of this review is to examine some of the assumptions behind efforts to reduce Salmonella contamination of raw poultry , with the ultimate goal of reducing the risk of human salmonellosis . 
Reduced incidence of human salmonellosis will be only an accidental product of more demanding standards for Salmonella on raw poultry unless those standards are scientiﬁcally linked to reduced risk . 
The possibility of reducing human salmonellosis by targeting raw poultry meat is limited to the amount of illness associated with exposure to Salmonella on poultry meat and any related cross-contamination during food preparation . 
Many studies and expert reports have concluded , however , that only a small amount of data is available for attributing illness to speciﬁc foods or for developing effective intervention strategies ( Batz et al. 2005 , Hald et al. 2004 , NRC 2009 ) . 
Human salmonellosis will not decrease until the risk of acquiring the illness is reduced , and any scientiﬁc approach to controlling risk will be constrained by the quality of available information . 
A science-based food safety policy requires a scientiﬁc link between microbiological criteria that are being established and the public health problem that justiﬁes the policy ( ICMSF 2006 , IOM/NRC 2003 , Todd 2004 ) . 
Estimates of the percentage of salmonellosis caused by exposure to contaminated food vary from 55 % to 96 % in different countries ( Havelaar et al. 2008 , Mead et al. 1999 , Sumner et al. 2003 ) . 
People in different parts of the world have characteristic ways of producing and preparing foods , so it is unlikely that all parts of the world have similar proportions of foodborne salmonellosis . 
Moreover , food systems and consumer practices change over time and attribution percentages change and need periodic reexamination ( Greig & Ravel 2009 ) . 
Methods for attributing illness to speciﬁc food sources can be classiﬁed into four main approaches : epidemiology , microbiology , risk assessment , and expert elicitation , with all methods having advantages and disadvantages ( Batz et al. 2005 , EFSA 2008 , NRC 2009 , Pires et al. 2009 , USDA/FSIS 2008 ) . 
Elicitation of expert opinion tends to produce the highest estimates for human cases of salmonellosis associated with exposure to poultry meat ( such as 35 % in Hoffman et al. 2007 ) ; although , international outbreak data can also yield estimates in the same range ( Greig & Ravel 2009 ) . 
Whether outbreak data can be extrapolated to all cases of salmonellosis is not certain . 
Over the past 40 years , rates of human salmonellosis have declined in most developed countries , even as consumption of poultry meat has increased considerably . 
Current estimates of the percentage of human cases of salmonellosis attributed to exposure to poultry meat generally range from 10 % to 22 % in developed countries ( Dalton et al. 2004 , EFSA 2008 , Havelaar et al. 2008 , Karns et al. 2007 , Kirk et al. 2008 , Mullner et al. 2009 , Pires et al. 2010 , Ravel et al. 2009 , USDA/FSIS 2008 , Van Asselt et al. 2009 ) . 
According to some authorities , however , the rate of nonfoodborne transmission is underestimated ( Barber et al. 2003 , Mead et al. 2010 ) . 
In the United States , the source of Salmonella is identiﬁed in only about 0.13 % of the estimated 1,400,000 annual human cases of salmonellosis ( Barber et al. 2003 ) , leaving considerable uncertainty regarding sources of exposure . 
If there are more than a million cases annually , then at any moment there are tens of thousands of human carriers ( Barber et al. 2003 ) . 
Several reviews have emphasized the carrier role of humans and the need to isolate poultry from humans ( Aho 1992 , Barber et al. 2003 ) . 
Kinde et al. ( 1996 ) identiﬁed sewage efﬂuent as the likely source of a Salmonella infection in a California layer ﬂock , and several surveys have isolated Salmonella from human sewage sludge or efﬂuent , including 54 serotypes from 11 sewage treatment plants in the United States ( Kinde et al. 1997 ) and 49 serotypes from eight plants in Sweden ( Sahlstrom et al. 2004 , 2006 ) . 
In the Netherlands , the major risk for Typhimurium infections in children from ages 4 to 12 was playing in a sandbox ( Doorduyn et al. 2006 ) . 
Working in a garden was one of the leading risk factors in Canada for the months of June and July ( Ravel et al. 2010 ) . 
Despite the widespread perception of poultry meat and eggs as the predominant sources of Salmonella , recent outbreaks in the United States have been caused by contaminated jalapeno peppers ( the largest outbreak in a decade ) , peanut butter , tomatoes , ground beef , puffed vegetable snacks , and pets such as turtles and African dwarf frogs ( CDC 2005 , 2008a , 2010 ) . 
The wide variation in numbers of cases coming from nonfood and nonpoultry sources makes it extremely difﬁcult to attribute a speciﬁc amount of human salmonellosis to raw poultry meat , even though we know that poultry meat is a source of Salmonella . 
If the amount of salmonellosis caused by exposure to raw poultry meat can not be determined with a reasonable degree of certainty , is it possible to estimate how much of a reduction in 
Human salmonellosis data ( cases per 100,000 ) from FoodNet and the Public Health Laboratory Information System ( PHLIS ) , Salmonella prevalence data ( % ) from retail chicken breasts [ National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System ( NARMS ) ] , and chilled chicken carcasses [ Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point ( HACCP ) ] from 1996 to 2009 . 
Salmonella contamination of raw poultry is needed to observe an associated decrease in the rate of human illness ? 
Can the contribution of nonfood and nonpoultry-related sources be adequately determined to enable an accurate determination of the number of human cases of salmonellosis associated with raw poultry exposure ? 
The ability to correlate reductions in Salmonella contamination of raw poultry meat with human salmonellosis is limited by the imprecision of the data collected and the large annual , seasonal , and geographic variation in rates of illness . 
Examples of various national and international surveillance systems have been reported by Doyle & Erickson ( 2006 ) . 
In the United States , the Public Health Laboratory Information System ( PHLIS ) and FoodNet are the primary sources of national data regarding the incidence of human salmonellosis . 
Information about Salmonella on raw chicken is available from Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point ( HACCP ) data collected by the Food Safety and Inspection Service ( FSIS ) of the United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) and the National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System ( NARMS ) program , which samples retail chicken breasts in areas that provide FoodNet human data . 
Figure 1 provides HACCP data for the prevalence of Salmonella on chilled chicken carcasses ( USDA/FSIS 2010 ) , NARMS data for the prevalence of Salmonella on retail chicken breasts ( US FDA 2010 ) , and Public Health Laboratory Information System ( CDC 2008b ) and FoodNet data ( CDC 2009 ) of the incidence of human salmonellosis ( cases per 100,000 ) . 
Analysis of the data in Figure 1 reveals why attribution of human illness to a speciﬁc food commodity is problematic . 
There is no signiﬁcant correlation ( J.A. Cason , N.A. Cox , and L.J. Richardson , unpublished data ) between the two measures of Salmonella prevalence on raw chicken , between the two measures of incidence of human salmonellosis , or between any combination of the chicken and human data . 
Perhaps there are too many other sources of Salmonella contributing to human salmonellosis that mask the relationship between human illness and prevalence on chicken , or prevalence of Salmonella on raw chicken is not the best measure of risk of human salmonellosis from chicken , or Salmonella prevalence on chicken is not measured in a way that relates to risk of human illness , e.g. , many Salmonella serotypes from poultry , such as Kentucky strains , rarely cause human illness . 
Data from studies using different sampling methods are available from some European countries . 
Human salmonellosis rates from 2008 ( EFSA 2010a ) can be compared to processing plant data of Salmonella prevalence on chickens that were sampled in the same year ( EFSA 2010b ) . 
Data are not available for all member countries of the European Union ( EU ) , but illustrative results Cox · Cason · Richardson are shown in Table 1 , along with the 2008 results from the United States . 
Table 1 also includes estimates of the percentage of salmonellosis cases attributed to international travel ( not acquired domestically ) ( EFSA 2010a ) . 
The correlation between Salmonella prevalence on raw chicken and salmonellosis in humans in Table 1 is not signiﬁcant , whether calculated for all reported human cases or only for cases attributed to domestic origin , nor are there signiﬁcant correlations if the three countries with a prevalence of zero Salmonella in neck skin samples are left out of the calculations ( J.A. Cason , N.A. Cox , and L.J. Richardson , unpublished data ) . 
Problems similar to those mentioned in the analysis of the United States data may exist for the European data set as well . 
The lack of correlation between the prevalence of Salmonella in poultry and the incidence of human salmonellosis in both the United States and Europe illustrates the difﬁculty of attributing human salmonellosis to speciﬁc foods , as discussed above . 
In addition to the nonfood and nonpoultry sources of human exposure that complicate efforts to deﬁne the relationship between Salmonella contamination of poultry and associated human illness , there is a strong seasonal component to human salmonellosis . 
In recent FoodNet data for the United States , the peak-to-trough ratio is more than two , with the peak in cases occurring in the summer months ( CDC 2007 ) , a pattern reported by many other countries as well ( Ravel et al. 2010 ) . 
Salmonella prevalence data from broiler chicken HACCP samples analyzed by FSIS show a lower peak-to-trough ratio , with peak prevalence occurring between August and November ( Lange 2006 ) . 
Salmonella prevalence on broiler chicken farms in the Netherlands also peaks during the months of July to December ( van der Fels-Klerx et al. 2008 ) , although seasonal differences for on-farm Salmonella were not so apparent in another study ( van de Giessen et al. 2006 ) , and there was no seasonal effect seen in processing plants ( van der Fels-Klerx et al. 2008 ) . 
A study conducted in Canada found little seasonality in Salmonella prevalence on retail chicken and no correlation with the seasonal pattern in human illness ( Ravel et al. 2010 ) . 
Less seasonal variation has been reported for the more serious cases of human salmonellosis ( Gradel et al. 2007 ) , with further complicating factors such as increased likelihood of antibiotic use in the weeks before human illness ( Gradel et al. 2008 ) . 
After more than a half century of sampling poultry carcasses and environments for Salmonella , sampling and experimental design issues still exist . 
Recent reviews have addressed sample preparation ( Brehm-Stetcher et al. 2009 ) , the quality of experimental design and reporting ( Sargeant et al. 2009 ) , the quality of statistical analysis ( Gardner 2004 , Ogliari et al. 2007 ) , and the best practices for investigating and reporting the relationship between food animals and food safety ( O'Connor et al. 2010 ) . 
Many reviews are available for microbiological sampling of poultry ( Aho 1992 , Capita et al. 2004 , Carrique-Mas et al. 2008 , Davies 2005 , Mead 2007 ) . 
A recent review of measurement uncertainty in sampling of food for bacteria reports that bias can be introduced by the choice of sampling method , in the way that the original sample is collected , transported , and stored , in subsampling methods , or by the accuracy of all of these procedures ( Corry et al. 2007 ) . 
An expert consensus on the most appropriate sampling sites and methods for determining the Salmonella status of poultry ﬂocks and poultry meat has never been reached , because comparing results between different methods is not a simple matter ( Mead et al. 2010 ) . 
The lack of uniformity in pre - and postharvest sampling methods can lead to misinterpretation of results when comparing Salmonella prevalence across different studies . 
In a recent compilation of data on the prevalence of Salmonella on poultry meat , for example , a summary table revealed that reporting countries used either 1 , 25 , 50 , or 60 gram samples of meat ( EFSA 2010b ) . 
The likelihood of isolating Salmonella increases with a larger sample weight and with increasing amounts of skin included in the sample ( Jorgenson et al. 2002 ) . 
In general , sampling methods were developed based largely on ease of performance and cost , and the relationship of results to human illness was not an important consideration . 
There are many potential sampling sites and types of sampling methods used in feed mills , hatcheries , farms , processing plants , and distribution channels . 
Some typical sample types are discussed in Mead et al. 2010 and other previously cited reviews . 
On farms in Europe , sampling of fecally contaminated litter is done using boot swabs ( Davies 2005 ) . 
Several reports indicate that intestinal tract samples from birds identify more Salmonella-positive ﬂocks ( Rasschaert et al. 2007 , Van Hoorebeke et al. 2009 ) , but it has never been shown whether ﬂocks identiﬁed as Salmonella-positive by more intensive sampling approaches are more likely to cause human illness . 
During processing , several different carcass and meat sampling methods are frequently used . 
Neck skin sampling and meat samples of 10 or 25 grams are commonly used in Europe . 
Whole carcass rinsing with 400 or 500 milliliters of rinse liquid per carcass is used in countries such as the United States and Australia with 7.5 % or 20 % of the rinse liquid cultured for Salmonella ( USDA/FSIS 1996b , FSANZ 2010 ) . 
Chilling carcasses in air , as is a common practice in the EU , or in water , which is commonly done in the United States , may affect the results if drying of the skin enables Salmonella cells to better attach to the carcass . 
The European Food Safety Authority 's Panel on Biohazards has recently suggested that more data are needed from additional studies on the `` possible correlation between Salmonella targets in broiler ﬂocks and expected contamination levels in the resulting poultry meat , '' indicating that such a correlation needs further reﬁnement ( EFSA 2010b ) . 
The panel also stated that it is not possible to establish a quantitative link between the Salmonella criteria for poultry meat and any risk or implication for public health . 
If rearing and processing modiﬁcations aimed at reducing Salmonella are not tested using appropriate sampling methods , apparent reductions may be misleading and may not reduce human salmonellosis . 
If conditions experienced by bacteria in the sample during transport to the laboratory are not equivalent to those conditions experienced by the chicken meat destined for the consumer , results from the sample might not be relevant to public health . 
Currently , there is no validated method for detecting Salmonella-contaminated carcasses or ﬂocks that are the greatest risk to human health because risk assessment has not reached that level of sophistication . 
No studies have been reported that correlate laboratory culture methods for detecting Salmonella in foods with the risk of acquiring human salmonellosis . 
Current methods were developed to obtain the greatest number of Salmonella-positive samples with an acceptable cost and ease of performance , and no consideration was given to determining the relationship of results to the risk of acquiring human salmonellosis . 
Different types of samples can contain different microbial competitors , nutrients , and antimicrobial inhibitors , and there is a different response regarding Salmonella growth , depending on the degree of stress or sublethal injury that the bacteria may have experienced ; hence , sample characteristics and history must be considered when selecting a cultural methodology for Salmonella detection or isolation . 
Even for a relatively well-understood sample type such as a chilled poultry carcass , there is no internationally recognized standard methodology for Salmonella detection , either for sample size or microbiological methods . 
Use of different cultural media is not simply a matter of laboratory choice , with some methods delineated by regional , national , or international organizations . 
Classical cultural techniques for Salmonella detection generally follow a standard sequence , including a nonselective preenrichment ( which may be used depending on whether cells are stressed or are present in low numbers ) , a selective enrichment , isolation on selective agar media , biochemical screening with triple sugar and lysine iron agars , and serological conﬁrmation with poly-O and poly-H antisera . 
Many different media formulations have been developed for the preenrichment , enrichment , and selective isolation steps in the detection sequence . 
A survey of diagnostic veterinary laboratories in the United States revealed that 17 different selective enrichment media were being used ( Waltman & Mallinson 1995 ) . 
There were also differences in incubation temperatures , whether samples were incubated for 24 h or 48 h or both , or whether samples were subjected to delayed secondary enrichment conditions ( e.g. , samples held at room temperature for up to ﬁve additional days ) . 
Selective enrichment cultures were inoculated onto 14 different plating media , with most labs using two or more different types of media to increase the likelihood of recovering 
Salmonella . 
Finally , the survey revealed considerable variation in numbers of colonies selected for further testing by the different laboratories , with many selecting and identifying only one colony . 
Several collaborative studies have been done in 16 national reference laboratories in Europe comparing the efﬁcacy of procedures for Salmonella isolation and identiﬁcation from feces ( Voogt et al. 2002a , b ) . 
When standard samples were provided to all participating labs , the results revealed signiﬁcant differences among the labs and within different subsections of the study in the ability to detect Salmonella and identify the serotypes that were isolated . 
Several modiﬁed methods were used as the studies progressed , and new methods were developed in the absence of an ofﬁcial reference method for isolating Salmonella from fecal samples . 
Discussions of Salmonella detection in control or regulatory samples often assume accurate and reproducible results , but the reality of results of laboratory assays is that considerable variability can occur ( Waltman & Mallinson 1995 ; Voogt et al. 2002a , b ) . 
The commonly used liquid and solid media utilized for isolation of Salmonella in food laboratories have changed over time . 
Lactose broth , Gram negative broth , Rappaport ( Vassiliadis ) broth , selenite cystine broth , and tetrathionate broth were used years ago . 
All of these broths are still used to some degree , but the last three have been signiﬁcantly modiﬁed to increase their effectiveness . 
Plating media used over the years for Salmonella isolation included brilliant green , bismuth sulﬁte , Hektoen enteric , Salmonella-Shigella , and XLD agars . 
Some of these are rarely used today and others have been modiﬁed to increase isolation efﬁciency from different types of samples . 
Brilliant green with sulfapyridine added is now called BGS . 
XLD has had many modiﬁcations , including addition of sodium thiosulfate and Tergitol 4 to make XLT4 agar . 
These additions have improved overall performance of these media . 
Food microbiology laboratories usually use two or more plating media to reduce the occurrence of false-negative results ( Cox & Berrang 2000 ) . 
Rappaport 's enrichment medium was modiﬁed to become the widely used Rappaport-Vassiliadis ( RV ) broth ( Vassiliadis 1983 ) and was then further modiﬁed with the development of modiﬁed semisolid RV ( MSRV ) for selection of motile Salmonella ( De Smedt et al. 1986 ) . 
The main reason for development and adoption of different media has always been isolation of the maximum number of colonies of Salmonella serotypes other than Typhi . 
The widespread use of MSRV in Europe during the past 20 years , as opposed to less use in the United States and some other parts of world , may have inﬂuenced the reported differences in isolation rates and prevalence of different serotypes in various parts of the world . 
Polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) - based , immunological , and other nontraditional methods skip some of the steps in classical microbiology and are used in many laboratories , but presumptive positives still must be conﬁrmed by traditional cultural methods . 
In addition to conﬁrmation , this provides an isolate that can be used for serotyping . 
Even with the development of more rapid methods , such assays usually require the presence of 103 or 104 cells for detection ; hence , enrichment is still required for most food samples , which generally have less than 103 salmonellae per 25 g. PCR was determined to be better than traditional culture methods for detecting Salmonella in neck skin samples , but both methods together detected more positives than either method individually ( Whyte et al. 2002 ) , also a common observation for any two conventional cultural methods . 
Additional sampling and methodology issues are discussed in a recent publication by the National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods ( NACMCF 2010 ) . 
What is the true prevalence of Salmonella on poultry ? 
Salmonella prevalence rates on chicken carcasses can be increased or decreased depending on the sampling methods used , such as changing the portion cultured after whole carcass rinsing or changing the sample weight in neck skin or meat sampling ( Cox & Blankenship 1975 ; King et al. 2008 ; Simmons et al. 2003a , b ; Surkiewicz et al. 1969 ) . 
Culturing a smaller sample size can reduce the prevalence of Salmonella on poultry , whereas larger-than-typical size samples can increase the prevalence . 
Sampling methods for determining Salmonella prevalence are often based on convenience or previous experience , and prevalence data are often presented and compared with insufﬁcient information regarding testing methods . 
Studies at the retail level have revealed that there has been less change in prevalence of Salmonella on chicken meat than anticipated ( Fletcher 2006 ) . 
Remarkably , data reported in 81 publications between 1961 and 2004 revealed average Salmonella prevalence on chicken meat was similar in different parts of the world , in different decades , and as determined by several different methods . 
Despite many programs to control Salmonella in chickens , not much changed in broad averages of data from supermarkets and shops at the point nearest the consumer , with a mean retail prevalence of about 31 % . 
Fletcher concluded that regulatory pressure to reduce Salmonella in processing plant samples would not improve public health unless Salmonella prevalence was also reduced at the point of distribution and sale . 
The location at which prevalence samples are obtained may also be an important factor in determining the relationship between prevalence of Salmonella on raw poultry and the risk of acquisition of human salmonellosis . 
Compared to other sampling methods , neck skin samples have less variation in indicator bacteria that are present in relatively high numbers ( Hutchison et al. 2006 ) . 
Salmonella prevalence results from neck skin samples are sometimes similar to results from whole carcass rinse sampling ( Cox et al. 2010c , Sarlin et al. 1998 ) ; although , higher prevalence in neck skin samples has been reported in cutting plants ( Burfoot et al. 2009 ) and with retail chicken ( Jorgenson et al. 2002 ) . 
A study in which only one to four grams of neck skin were assayed compared to the 25 grams usually tested today revealed that whole carcass rinses had a signiﬁcantly higher Salmonella prevalence ( Cox et al. 1978 ) . 
The neck skin -- whole carcass rinse comparison may be affected by the number of Salmonella cells that are present on the carcasses and the extent to which they are attached to the carcass , so that different ﬂocks and different processing methods may affect the results . 
Three of the cited studies were done with immersion-chilled carcasses ( Cox et al. 1978 , 2010c ; Sarlin et al. 1998 ) , one with air-chilled carcasses ( Burfoot et al. 2009 ) , and the chilling method was not apparent in the other paper ( Jorgenson et al. 2002 ) . 
In whole carcass rinse sampling , the rinse liquid comes in contact with the entire surface of the carcass if the rinse procedure is properly conducted . 
A neck skin sample of approximately 25 grams is a relatively small percentage of the total skin or surface area of the whole carcass , so the approximate equivalence observed in several studies may imply that there are more than a few Salmonella cells that are attached or associated with the skin and carcass and are about as likely to be isolated from macerating the neck skin as from a rinse of the entire carcass . 
Finding a higher Salmonella prevalence in neck skin than in whole carcass rinse samples may indicate that many of the cells are attached or associated to some degree with the skin and are not being recovered by rinsing the carcass . 
In whole carcass rinse sampling , the ﬁrst Salmonella-positive rinse is found sometimes only after multiple negative rinses of the same carcass ( Izat et al. 1991 , Lillard 1989 ) . 
As indicated by Brehm-Stecher and colleagues ( 2009 ) , prevalence reports the proportion of samples that are positive without reference to the number and strains of bacteria that are present . 
This review points out many examples in which prevalence information alone is inadequate for a human health risk assessment . 
Enumeration of Salmonella is difﬁcult and expensive compared to estimating counts of many common bacteria . 
As a result of the cost of most-probable-number ( MPN ) procedures that are largely used to estimate numbers of Salmonella in samples , Salmonella cell numbers are rarely reported in the scientiﬁc literature compared with the number of papers that report Salmonella prevalence . 
A three-tube MPN inoculated at three dilutions will be about nine times more expensive than a prevalence test and will have conﬁdence intervals that are considerably larger than those from counting bacteria on plates . 
Enumeration of salmonellae on carcasses or parts of carcasses is done by removing bacteria from the sample and suspending them in liquid . 
The resulting estimates have an uncertain relationship with the number of salmonellae that remain on the carcass ( as in whole carcass rinsing for which the carcass is not incubated ) or were not included in the partial sample ( as in neck skin sampling for which salmonellae on the remainder of the carcass are not included in the sample ) . 
Salmonellae that are not included in the suspension tested in the laboratory may remain on the carcass and reach the consumer . 
For aerobic bacteria and Enterobacteriaceae that are present on poultry carcasses in large numbers , a single whole carcass rinse removes only about 10 % of the total bacteria that can be removed with repeated , multiple rinses ( Lillard 1988 , 1989 ) . 
The numerical relationship between bacterial cells removed and cells remaining on the carcass is much less certain for bacteria that are present in relatively low numbers . 
For broiler chickens , the mean MPN value for Salmonellapositive whole carcass rinses is often cited as approximately 30 , a much lower and more variable number than that of aerobic bacteria or Enterobacteriaceae in chicken carcass rinses . 
Some information is available , however , concerning the relatively few chicken carcasses or chicken parts carrying high numbers of Salmonella . 
MPN values of 2,071 immersion-chilled chicken carcasses were reported using the same methods ( USDA/FSIS 1996a , CFIA 2000 ) . 
Of the 2,071 carcasses sampled in the two baselines , there were four carcasses that had MPN values greater than 12,000 per carcass ( MPN per milliliter multiplied by the number of milliliters of rinse ) , with the most contaminated sample containing 112,000 . 
In the most recent baseline study of 3,275 carcasses sampled at the rehang point between the kill and evisceration sections of processing plants , the most contaminated carcass had a total Salmonella MPN of 1,100 per ml or 440,000 for the entire carcass ( USDA/FSIS 2009 ) . 
A study in England in which 241 whole chickens at retail were sampled revealed two carcasses with approximately 104 salmonellae each , as determined by direct plating ( Jorgenson et al. 2002 ) . 
Results of other studies have revealed large numbers in a few samples when Salmonella cells on chicken carcasses , chicken breasts , or meat were enumerated ( Cason et al. 2007 , DuFrenne et al. 2001 , Straver et al. 2007 , Uyttendaele et al. 2009 ) . 
If the single-rinse to total-carcass bacteria ratios reported for aerobic bacteria counts and Enterobacteriaceae cell numbers hold true for carcasses contaminated with large numbers of Salmonella , there are likely many more Salmonella cells present on those carcasses that are not recovered in any type of nondestructive sampling . 
The importance of enumerating Salmonella has been emphasized in an expert report by the American Society for Microbiology ( ASM 2006 ) and the National Advisory Committee on 
Microbiological Criteria for Foods ( NACMCF 2004 ) . 
The ASM report indicated that enumeration of Salmonella would be `` a major scientiﬁc step forward . '' 
Both organizations reported that the efﬁcacy of pathogen reduction can not be determined without enumeration , because control efforts could reduce pathogen cell numbers and risk to human health even if prevalence is not changing . 
Cell numbers are also important for conducting risk assessments , which have shown that risk can be reduced with no change in prevalence ( Lammerding 2006 , WHO 2002 ) . 
Risk assessments have also revealed that most of the risk of acquiring human salmonellosis is from exposure to chicken carcasses and parts that are contaminated with large numbers of salmonellae ( Straver et al. 2007 , Uyttendaele et al. 2009 , WHO 2002 ) . 
Many experts believe that most poultry-related cases of salmonellosis are caused by crosscontamination in the kitchen from raw poultry meat to other foods or back to cooked poultry , with cross-contamination studies revealing movement of bacteria from chicken skin to other surfaces with relative ease ( Chen et al. 2001 , Luber 2009 , Zhao et al. 1998 ) . 
Luber ( 2009 ) noted that the World Health Organization risk model for chicken meat ( WHO 2002 ) does not include the risk of cross-contamination of Salmonella from meat to other surfaces . 
It is likely that a highly contaminated carcass or portion of meat has a greater probability of transferring Salmonella cells to other surfaces than a carcass contaminated with only a few cells of Salmonella . 
Calculations can be done to relate Salmonella cell numbers present in a sample to the likelihood of a Salmonella-positive prevalence test result . 
For whole carcass rinse samples , for example , a portion of the total rinse is cultured for the presence of Salmonella , with aliquot volume varying in different testing plans ( King et al. 2008 , USDA/FSIS 1996a ) . 
Assuming that all cells recover and reproduce during enrichment , the probability of a Salmonella-positive test can be calculated as P ( + ) = 1 -- ( 1 -- 30/400 ) n where n equals the number of suspended cells in 400 milliliters of rinse and a 30-ml aliquot is tested for the presence of Salmonella . 
Figure 2 shows an approximate histogram of the relationship between cell numbers of Salmonella in a whole carcass rinse versus Salmonella prevalence based on an aliquot from that rinse , with the x-axis ( total cell numbers recovered in a carcass rinse ) on a log scale and with observed frequency on the y-axis . 
With nine cells suspended in the rinse , there is an approximately 50 % chance of a Salmonella-positive test result , so at the low end of the x-axis there are many false-negative results even though the rinses contain cells of Salmonella . 
However , we believe that these Salmonella-negative results have little signiﬁcance for human illness because risk models indicate that most human salmonellosis is caused by exposure 
Histogram of log10 Salmonella cells in whole carcass rinses ( blue line ) showing the relationship between numbers of cells in 400 ml of rinse and the probability of a positive test when an aliquot of 30 ml is cultured , with the gray line separating test positive and test negative results . 
to chicken carcasses and parts contaminated with more than 104 cells per carcass ( Straver et al. 2007 , WHO 2002 ) . 
Hence , the most contaminated chicken meat products carry a higher risk of causing salmonellosis ( Uyttendaele et al. 2009 ) . 
Heavily contaminated carcasses should also be much more likely to cross-contaminate other foods . 
Although the scientiﬁcally conservative position is to regard all Salmonella serotypes as human pathogens ( all are considered pathogenic at some dose ) , there are known differences between serotypes in ability to survive stress , colonize animals , invade tissues , and cause disease with varying outcomes . 
Among the common Salmonella serotypes causing human illness , the percentage of cases of salmonellosis that are hospitalized varies from 14 % to 67 % , with the range of case fatality rates varying by more than 100-fold ( Jones et al. 2008 ) . 
Septecemia caused by different serotypes is strongly inﬂuenced by increasing age of the patient , but there are major serotype differences , with Virchow being more invasive in young children and Enteritidis in persons more than 60 years of age ( Weinberger et al. 2004 ) . 
Salmonella of different serotypes also differ in ability to survive food processing conditions , with Enteritidis surviving better than Typhimurium and Infantis , and much better than Dublin ( Hald et al. 2004 ) . 
In a model that incorporated seven major Salmonella serotypes ( not including Enteritidis ) with all serotypes assumed to be equally capable of causing disease , in United States data , there was a mismatch between observed illnesses and expected outcomes ( Sarwari et al. 2001 ) . 
More illnesses than expected were caused by Typhimurium and Newport , with many fewer cases than expected caused by Kentucky and Derby . 
When a tenfold higher risk was assumed for each major food animal ( cattle , swine , and poultry ) , there was little effect on the results , with each serotype 's ability to cause disease having more impact on human illness than the type of serotypes in each animal . 
In Danish surveillance data , serotypes Newport , Virchow , and Thompson were more virulent than Enteritidis ( Pires & Hald 2010 ) . 
In general , Salmonella methodology has been selected based on maximum recovery of positive colonies and not on ﬁnding speciﬁc Salmonella serotypes within a food sample . 
Many studies have demonstrated , however , that cultural techniques can inﬂuence the serotypes that are recovered from samples ( Carrique-Mas & Davies 2008 , Harvey & Price 1967 , Kinde et al. 2004 , Love & Rostagno 2008 , Rostagno et al. 2005 , Singer et al. 2009 ) . 
Serotype bias has been documented since the 1950s , but the public health signiﬁcance is still little known and poorly understood . 
Enteritidis , for instance , is a major serotype in human illness , but when mixed in equal proportions and incubated overnight , Enteritidis is outgrown by Newport ( Singer et al. 2009 ) and by Heidelberg and Senftenberg ( Kinde et al. 2004 ) . 
Growth of Enteritidis in the presence of other serotypes in feces or hatchery ﬂuff is also reduced by the stress of drying ( Cox et al. 2010d ) . 
The unequal competition between serotypes may have implications for pooling of samples in monitoring of Salmonella in poultry . 
Some samples are routinely pooled in neck skin and farm sampling in Europe , possibly distorting the picture of what serotypes are present in multi-serotype samples . 
Multiple serotypes have been isolated from the same samples in some reports . 
In a study that sampled retail chicken wings and turkey necks by two culture methods , multiple serotypes were recovered from a high proportion of Salmonella-positive samples ( Temelli et al. 2010 ) . 
In a recent study in our laboratory , 49 of 52 broiler chicken carcasses rinsed immediately after defeathering were Salmonella-positive , with one serotype isolated from seven carcasses , two from 19 carcasses , three from 18 carcasses , and four from ﬁve carcasses ( Cox et al. 2010a ) . 
Other studies have revealed isolation of multiple Salmonella serotypes from individual samples ( FSANZ 2010 , Jorgenson et al. 2002 ) . 
Using multiple isolation media and picking three to ﬁve suspect colonies from each plate can result in the isolation of multiple Salmonella serotypes from a large percentage of individual samples . 
Picking only one colony per plate may underestimate the number of Salmonella serotypes that are present in a sample . 
Two recent research projects in our laboratory revealed different effects of plating media on serotype isolation from hatchery ﬂuff and carcass rinses ( Cox et al. 2010a , e ) . 
From the ﬂuff samples , 455 presumptive Salmonella isolates were subtyped with antisera . 
Serogroup C1 ( later identiﬁed as Lille ) was isolated 34 times from BGS or Hektoen Enteric plates , but only once from XLT4 plates . 
In the broiler carcass rinse study , on the other hand , serotype Kiambu was detected 15 times on XLT4 and never on BGS . 
When the isolates were later restreaked , the Lille was determined to be a weak H2S producer that did not appear as a typical Salmonella on XLT4 , and the Kiambu was a strong H2S producer that formed smaller-than-average colonies on BGS . 
All of the work was done by technicians well-experienced in isolating Salmonella , demonstrating that nontypical Salmonella colonies can be overlooked on plates that have many suspect colonies , even when multiple colonies are being selected . 
Serotype differences may explain some of the difﬁculty in attributing human salmonellosis to different foods . 
Many studies have revealed a poor match between human and animal Salmonella serotypes ( Heithoff et al. 2008 , Jones et al. 2008 , Kariuki et al. 2002 , Pointon et al. 2008 , Ravel et al. 2010 , Sarwari et al. 2001 , Schlosser et al. 2000 , Stevens et al. 2009 , Sumner et al. 2004 , Todd 2004 ) . 
One explanation may be that changes in serotype patterns have occurred between the hatchery and farm ( Bailey et al. 2002 ) , between the farm and processing plant ( McCrea et al. 2006 , van der Fels-Klerx et al. 2008 , Rasschaert et al. 2008 , Volkova et al. 2009 ) , and between the processing plant and retail ( Mellor et al. 2010 , Van Asselt et al. 2009 , Van de Giessen et al. 2006 ) . 
New serotypes can be introduced into a ﬂock because of contaminated transport cages and because of cross-contamination of serotypes between different ﬂocks via processing equipment ( Corry et al. 2002 , Rasschaert et al. 2008 ) . 
Differences in Salmonella isolation methods may be part of the reason for serotype changes from hatchery to farm to processing plant . 
Composition of samples is different ( environment and fecal , carcass rinses or neck skin ) and stresses experienced by the salmonellae can be different ( dry versus wet , temperature changes , chemical stress in some countries ) . 
The differential response of Salmonella of various serotypes to different laboratory culture methods may also be a factor in the changing serotype patterns reported during rearing and processing of poultry . 
Mismatches are observed frequently in serotypes of Salmonella isolates obtained from food animals and from infected humans . 
Isolations of Paratyphi B var . 
L ( + ) tartrate + ( formerly known as Java ) increased explosively in poultry in recent years in the Netherlands and northern Europe ( Van Pelt et al. 2003 , Van de Giessen et al. 2006 , Van Asselt et al. 2009 ) , with few human illnesses caused by this serotype being reported . 
More isolations of this serotype occur in retail samples than in processing plant samples ( Van de Giessen et al. 2006 ) . 
Kentucky has been isolated from more than 50 % of chicken HACCP samples and from NARMS retail chicken breast monitoring samples , but Kentucky typically causes only 0.3 % of human cases in the United States ( CDC 2008b ) . 
Serotype Soﬁa ( now known by its antigenic formula II 1,4,12,27 : b : [ e , n , x ] ) has been isolated from more than 90 % of poultry isolates during some years in parts of Australia , but has been isolated from few human cases there ( Harrington et al. 1991 , Mellor et al. 2010 , Pointon et al. . 
2008 , Sumner et al. 2004 ) . 
Soﬁa attaches to processing plant equipment surfaces more efﬁciently than other Salmonella serotypes ( Chia et al. 2009 ) , so it may have properties that make it more likely to be isolated from poultry samples . 
Despite the importance of serotyping as a useful tool for understanding the contamination of raw poultry by Salmonella , serotype information alone is not sufﬁcient for ecological and epidemiologic investigations to understand the movement of Salmonella through the different stages of poultry production or the relationship of those strains to human salmonellosis . 
Hald et al. ( 2004 ) reported that serotype distributions are not enough information and that `` discriminatory epidemiological typing methods '' are needed for intensive monitoring of animal and human serotypes . 
Strain differences in virulence in mice of animal and human Typhimurium isolates were the main reason why there was a weak correlation between these strains in animal and human isolations ( Heithoff et al. 2008 ) . 
Antibiotic resistance patterns in isolates from imported meat and returning international travelers were helpful in identifying speciﬁc sources of some strains of Salmonella ( Hald et al. 2007 ) . 
Different Salmonella isolates of the same serotype found in environmental samples and in a chicken ﬂock are not always the same subtype , with preharvest strains usually not predominant in neck skin samples from processed carcasses ( Heyndrickx et al. 2007 ) . 
There are also important differences in strains of Salmonella from different parts of the world , with relatively avirulent strains of Soﬁa in Australia compared with virulent strains of the same serotype causing substantial human illness in Israel ( Harrington et al. 1991 ) . 
Enteritidis is a serotype that is responsible for a major percentage of human salmonellosis worldwide , but it is a somewhat unusual Salmonella in that it has relatively low genetic variability compared to other serotypes . 
Liebana et al. ( 2001 ) concluded that better methods such as phage typing or multiple molecular methods are needed to differentiate different strains of Enteritidis isolated from poultry . 
As with many subtyping methods , there is no deﬁnitive international agreement on the best molecular methods for subtyping Salmonella isolates . 
Pulsed ﬁeld gel electrophoresis ( PFGE ) and antibiogram patterns can also be used to evaluate the diversity within individual Salmonella serotypes . 
In another study in our laboratories , the PFGE and antimicrobial resistance patterns of Salmonella isolates were compared to 4,620 XbaI patterns originating from testing 17,597 isolates in USDA-VetNet ( Cox et al. 2010b ) . 
The isolates for this study originated from 52 whole carcass rinses that were tested using culture method combinations that are not commonly used by regulatory agencies . 
Compared to patterns within the USDA-VetNet database , a total of 10 new Salmonella PFGE XbaI patterns were identiﬁed from only 49 positive samples . 
The identiﬁcation of new patterns suggests that further work needs to be conducted on cultural inﬂuences that select certain Salmonella serotypes and subtypes . 
Taking into account the distinctions between Salmonella serotypes and strains that have been recognized in recent years , many older publications may need to be reevaluated . 
Many assumptions concerning generic Salmonella at different stages of rearing and processing were likely confounded with different serotypes and strains involved . 
Serotypes of Salmonella isolates obtained from the farm and during processing may not have been the same strain . 
Sampling and cultural methods may have skewed the results that were obtained . 
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations , memberships , funding , or ﬁnancial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review . 
LITERATURE CITED Aho M. 1992. Problems of Salmonella sampling. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 15:225–35
Am . 
Soc . 
Microbiol . 
( ASM ) . 
2006 . 
May 17 , 2006 -- ASM submits comments on FSIS Salmonella veriﬁcation reporting [ Docket No. 04-026N ] . 
http://www.asm.org/index.php/policy/may-17-2006-asm-submits-comments-on-fsis-salmonella-veriﬁcation-reporting.html Bailey JS , Cox NA , Craven SE , Cosby DE . 
2002 . 
Serotype tracking of Salmonella through integrated broiler chicken operations . 
J. Food Prot . 
65:742 -- 45 Barber DA , Miller GY , McNamara PE . 
2003 . 
Models of antimicrobial resistance and foodborne illness : examining assumptions and practical applications . 
J. Food Prot . 
66:700 -- 9 Batz MB , Doyle MP , Morris JG Jr , Painter J , Singh R , et al. 2005 . 
Attributing illness to food . 
Emerg . 
Infect Dis . 
11:993 -- 99 Brehm-Stecher B , Young C , Jaykus LA , Tortorello ML . 
2009 . 
Sample preparation : the forgotten beginning . 
J. Food Prot . 
72:1774 -- 89 Burfoot D , Archer J , Horvath E , Hooper G , Allen V , et al. 2009 . 
Technical report submitted to EFSA . 
Fate of Salmonella spp . 
on broiler carcasses before and after cutting and/or deboning . 
http://www.efsa . 
europa.eu / en/scdocs/doc / 45e . 
pdf 
Can . 
Food Insp. Agency . 
2000 . 
Canadian microbiological baseline survey of chicken broiler and young turkey carcasses , June 1997 -- May 1998 . 
http://dsp-psd.pwgsc.gc.ca/Collection/A62-53-2000E.pdf Capita R , Prieto M , Alonso-Calleja C. 2004 . 
Sampling methods for microbiological analysis of red meat and poultry carcasses . 
J. Food Prot . 
67:1303 -- 8 Carrique-Mas JJ , Breslin M , Sayers AR , McLaren I , Arnold M , Davies R. 2008 . 
Comparison of environmental sampling methods for detecting Salmonella in commercial laying ﬂocks in the UK . 
Lett . 
Appl . 
Microbiol . 
47:514 -- 19 Carrique-Mas JJ , Davies RH . 
2008 . 
Sampling and bacteriological detection of Salmonella in poultry and poultry premises : a review . 
Rev. Sci . 
Tech . 
27:665 -- 77 Cason JA , Hinton A Jr , Northcutt JK , Buhr RJ , Ingram KD , et al. 2007 . 
Partitioning of external and internal bacteria carried by broiler chickens before processing . 
J. Food Prot . 
70:2056 -- 62 Cent . 
Dis . 
Control Prev . 
( CDC ) . 
2005 . 
Preliminary FoodNet data on the incidence of infection with pathogens transmitted commonly through food -- 10 states , 2004 . 
Morb . 
Mortal . 
Wkly . 
Rep. 54 ( 14 ) :352 -- 56 Cent . 
Dis . 
Control Prev . 
( CDC ) . 
2007 . 
Foodborne active disease surveillance network ( FoodNet ) surveillance report 2007 , pp. 1 -- 46 . 
http://www.cdc.gov/foodnet/annual/2007/2007_annual_report_508.pdf Cent . 
Dis . 
Control Prev . 
( CDC ) . 
2008a . 
Preliminary FoodNet data on the incidence of infection with pathogens transmitted commonly through food -- 10 states , 2007 . 
Morb . 
Mortal . 
Wkly . 
Rep. 57:366 -- 70 Cent . 
Dis . 
Control Prev . 
( CDC ) . 
2008b . 
Salmonella Surveillance : Annual Summary , 2006 . 
Atlanta , GA : U.S. Dep . 
Health Hum . 
Serv . 
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dbmd/phlisdata/salmtab/ 2006/SalmonellaAnnualSummary2006.pdf Cent . 
Dis . 
Control Prev . 
( CDC ) . 
2009 . 
Preliminary FoodNet data on the incidence of infection with pathogens transmitted commonly through food -- 10 states , 2008 . 
Morb . 
Mortal . 
Wkly . 
Rep. 58:333 -- 37 Cent . 
Dis . 
Control Prev . 
( CDC ) . 
2010 . 
Preliminary FoodNet data on the incidence of infection with pathogens transmitted commonly through food -- 10 states , 2009 . 
Morb . 
Mortal . 
Wkly . 
Rep. 59:418 -- 22 Chen Y , Jackson KM , Chea FP , Schaffner DW . 
2001 . 
Quantiﬁcation and variability analysis of bacterial cross-contamination rates in common food service tasks . 
J. Food Prot . 
64:72 -- 80 Chia TWR , Goulter RM , McMeekin T , Dykes GA , Fegan N. 2009 . 
Attachment of different Salmonella serovars to materials commonly used in a poultry processing plant . 
Food Microbiol . 
26:853 -- 59 Corry JEL , Allen VM , Hudson WR , Breslin MF , Davies RH . 
2002 . 
Sources of Salmonella on broiler carcasses during transportation and processing : modes of contamination and methods of control . 
J. Appl . 
Microbiol . 
92:424 -- 32 Corry JEL , Jarvis B , Passmore S , Hedges A. 2007 . 
A critical review of measurement uncertainty in the enumeration of food micro-organisms . 
Food Microbiol . 
24:230 -- 53 Cox NA , Berrang ME . 
2000 . 
Inadequacy of selective plating media in ﬁeld determination of Salmonella . 
J. Appl . 
Poult . 
Res . 
9:403 -- 6 Cox NA , Blankenship LC . 
1975 . 
Comparison of rinse sampling methods for detection of salmonellae on eviscerated broiler carcasses . 
J. Food Prot . 
40:1333 -- 34 Cox NA , Fedorka-Cray PJ , Richardson LJ , Buhr RJ , House SL . 
2010a . 
Salmonella serotype diversity from broiler carcass rinsates evaluated by two secondary enrichments along with two plating media . 
Int . 
Poultry Sci . 
Forum , January 25 -- 26 , Atlanta , GA Cox NA , Fedorka-Cray PJ , Richardson LJ , Buhr RJ , McGlinchey B , et al. 2010b . 
Pulsed ﬁeld gel electrophoresis along with antimicrobial resistance pattern of Salmonella serotypes isolated from broiler external carcass rinses . 
Int . 
Poult . 
Sci . 
Forum , January 25 -- 26 , Atlanta , GA Cox NA , Mercuri AJ , Tanner DA , Carson MO , Thomson JE , Bailey JS . 
1978 . 
Effectiveness of sampling methods for Salmonella detection on processed broilers . 
J. Food Prot . 
41:341 -- 43 Cox NA , Richardson LJ , Cason JA , Buhr RJ , Vizzier-Thaxton Y , et al. 2010c . 
Comparison of neck skin excision and whole carcass rinse sampling methods for microbiological evaluation of broiler carcasses before and after immersion chilling . 
J. Food Prot . 
73:976 -- 80 Cox NA , Richardson LJ , Fedorka-Cray PJ , Cason JA , Buhr RJ . 
2010d . 
Salmonella growth characteristics utilizing different enrichment broths which contain other Salmonella serovars and extraneous microﬂora . 
Int . 
Poult . 
Sci . 
Forum , January 25 -- 26 , Atlanta , GA 
Cox NA , Richardson LJ , Fedorka-Cray PJ , Cason JA , Mauldin JM , et al. 2010e . 
Sensitivity and selectivity of cultivation methods to recovery a speciﬁc Salmonella serogroup from hatchery plenum samples . 
Int . 
Poult . 
Sci . 
Forum , January 25 -- 26 , Atlanta , GA Dalton CB , Gregory J , Kirk MD , Stafford RJ , Givney R , et al. 2004 . 
Foodborne disease outbreaks in Australia , 1995 to 2000 . 
Commun . 
Dis . 
Intell . 
28:211 -- 24 Davies RH . 
2005 . 
Pathogen populations on poultry farms . 
In Food Safety Control in the Poultry Industry , ed . 
GC Mead , pp. 101 -- 52 . 
Cambridge , UK : Woodhead De Smedt JM , Bolderdijk R , Rappold H , Lautenschlaeger D. 1986 . 
Rapid Salmonella detection in foods by motility enrichment on modiﬁed semisolid Rappaport-Vassiliadis medium . 
J. Food Prot . 
49:510 -- 14 Doorduyn Y , Van Den Brandhof WE , Van Duynhoven YTHP , Wannet WJB , Van Pelt W. 2006 . 
Risk factors for Salmonella Enteritidis and Typhimurium ( DT104 and non-DT104 ) infections in The Netherlands : predominant roles for raw eggs in Enteritidis and sandboxes in Typhimurium infections . 
Epidemiol . 
Infect . 
134:617 -- 26 Doyle MP , Erickson MC . 
2006 . 
Emerging microbiological food safety issues related to meat . 
Meat Sci . 
74:98 -- 112 Dufrenne J , Ritmeester W , Delfgou-van Asch E , van Leusden F , de Jonge R. 2001 . 
Quantiﬁcation of the contamination of chicken and chicken products in the Netherlands with Salmonella and Campylobacter . 
J. Food Prot . 
64:538 -- 41 Eur . 
Food Saf . 
Auth . 
( EFSA ) . 
2008 . 
A quantitative microbiological risk assessment on Salmonella in meat : source attribution for human salmonellosis from meat . 
EFSA J. 625:1 -- 32 Eur . 
Food Saf . 
Auth . 
( EFSA ) . 
2010a . 
The community summary report on trends and sources of zoonoses , zoonotic agents and food-borne outbreaks in the European Union in 2008 . 
EFSA J. 8:1496 Eur . 
Food Saf . 
Auth . 
( EFSA ) . 
2010b . 
Scientiﬁc opinion on the link between Salmonella criteria at different stages of the poultry production chain . 
EFSA J. 8:1545 Fletcher DL . 
2006 . 
Inﬂuence of sampling methodology on reported incidence of Salmonella in poultry . 
J. AOAC Int . 
89:512 -- 16 Food Stand . 
Aust . 
N.Z. ( FSANZ ) , South Aust . 
Res . 
Dev . 
Inst . 
2010 . 
Baseline survey on the prevalence and concentration of Salmonella and Campylobacter in chicken meat on-farm and at primary processing . 
http://www.foodstandards.gov.au/scienceandeducation/factsheets/factsheets2010/ rawchickenmeatmicrob4764.cfm Gardner IA . 
2004 . 
An epidemiological critique of current microbial risk assessment practices : the importance of prevalence and test accuracy data . 
J. Food Prot . 
67:2000 -- 7 Gradel KO , Dethlefsen C , Ejlertsen T , Schonheyder HC , Nielsen H. 2008 . 
Increased prescription rate of antibiotics prior to non-typhoid Salmonella infections : a one-year nested case-control study . 
Scand . 
J. Infect . 
Dis . 
40:635 -- 41 Gradel KO , Dethlefsen C , Schonheyder HC , Ejlertsen T , Sorensen HT , et al. 2007 . 
Severity of infection and seasonal variation of non-typhoid Salmonella occurrence in humans . 
Epidemiol . 
Infect . 
135:93 -- 99 Greig JD , Ravel L. 2009 . 
Analysis of foodborne outbreak data reported internationally for source attribution . 
Int . 
J. Food Microbiol . 
130:77 -- 87 Hald T , Vose D , Wegener HC , Koupeev T. 2004 . 
A Bayesian approach to quantify the contribution of animal-food sources to human salmonellosis . 
Risk Anal . 
24:255 -- 69 Hald T , Wong DLF , Aarestrup FM . 
2007 . 
The attribution of human infections with antimicrobial resistant Salmonella bacteria in Denmark to sources of animal origin . 
Foodborne Pathog . 
Dis . 
4:313 -- 26 Harrington CS , Lanser JA , Manning PA , Murray CJ . 
1991 . 
Epidemiology of Salmonella soﬁa in Australia . 
Appl . 
Environ . 
Microbiol . 
57:223 -- 27 Harvey RW , Price TH . 
1967 . 
The examination of samples infected with multiple Salmonella serotypes . 
J. Hyg . 
65:423 -- 34 Havelaar AH , Galindo AV , Kurowicka D , Cooke RM . 
2008 . 
Attribution of foodborne pathogens using structured expert elicitation . 
Foodborne Pathog . 
Dis . 
5:649 -- 59 Heithoff DM , Shimp WR , Lau PW , Badie G , Enioutina EY , et al. 2008 . 
Human Salmonella clinical isolates distinct from those of animal origin . 
Appl . 
Environ . 
Microbiol . 
74:1757 -- 66 
Heyndrickx M , Herman L , Vlaes L , Butzler J-P , Wildemauwe C , et al. 2007 . 
Multiple typing for the epidemiological study of the contamination of broilers with Salmonella from the hatchery to the slaughterhouse . 
J. Food Prot . 
70:323 -- 34 Hoffmann S , Fischbeck P , Krupnick A , McWilliams M. 2007 . 
Using expert elicitation to link foodborne illnesses in the United States to foods . 
J. Food Prot . 
70:1220 -- 29 Hutchison ML , Walters LD , Mead GC , Howell M , Allen VN . 
2006 . 
An assessment of sampling methods and microbiological hygiene indicators for process veriﬁcation in poultry slaughterhouses . 
J. Food Prot . 
69:145 -- 53 Int . 
Comm . 
Microbiol . 
Specif . 
Foods ( ICMSF ) . 
2006 . 
Use of epidemiologic data to measure the impact of food safety control programs . 
Food Control 17:825 -- 37 Inst . 
Med . 
/ Natl. Res . 
Counc . 
( IOM/NRC ) . 
2003 . 
Scientiﬁc Criteria to Ensure Safe Food . 
Washington , DC : Natl. Acad . 
Press Izat AL , Yamaguchi W , Kaniawati S , McGinnis JP , Raymond SG , et al. 1991 . 
Research note : use of consecutive carcass rinses and a most probable number procedure to estimate salmonellae contamination of inoculated broilers . 
Poult . 
Sci . 
70:1448 -- 51 Jones TF , Ingram LA , Cieslak PR , Vugia DJ , Tobin-D'Angelo M , et al. 2008 . 
Salmonellosis outcomes differ substantially by serotype . 
J. Infect . 
Dis . 
198:109 -- 14 Jorgensen F , Bailey R , Williams S , Henderson P , Wareing DRA , et al. 2002 . 
Prevalence and numbers of Salmonella and Campylobacter spp . 
on raw , whole chickens in relation to sampling methods . 
Int . 
J. Food Microbiol . 
76:151 -- 64 Kariuki S , Revathi G , Gakuya F , Yamo V , Muyodi J , Hart CA. 2002 . 
Lack of clonal relationship between non-typhi Salmonella strain types from humans and those isolated from animals living in close contact . 
FEMS Immunol . 
Med . 
Microbiol . 
33:165 -- 71 Karns SA , Muth MK , Coglaiti MC . 
2007 . 
Results of an additional expert elicitation on the relative risks of meat and poultry products . 
Final Rep. Research Triangle Park , NC : Research Triangle Inst . 
http://www.fsis.usda.gov/PDF/RBI_Elicitation_Report.pdf Kinde H , Adelson M , Ardans A , Little EH , Willoughby D , et al. 1997 . 
Prevalence of Salmonella in municipal sewage treatment plant efﬂuents in southern California . 
Avian Dis . 
41:392 -- 98 Kinde H , Castellan DM , Kass PH , Ardans A , Cutler G , et al. 2004 . 
The occurrence and distribution of Salmonella enteritidis and other serovars on California egg laying premises : a comparison of two sampling methods and two culturing techniques . 
Avian Dis . 
48:590 -- 94 Kinde H , Read DH , Ardans A , Breitmeyer RE , Willoughby D , et al. 1996 . 
Sewage efﬂuent : likely source of Salmonella enteritidis , phage type 4 infection in a commercial chicken layer ﬂock in southern California . 
Avian Dis . 
40:672 -- 76 King S , Galea F , Hornitzky M , Adams MC . 
2008 . 
A comparative evaluation of the sensitivity of Salmonella detection on processed chicken carcasses using Australian and US methodologies . 
Lett . 
Appl . 
Microbiol . 
46:205 -- 9 Kirk MD , McKay I , Hall GV , Dalton CB , Stafford R , et al. 2008 . 
Foodborne disease in Australia : the OzFoodNet experience . 
Clin . 
Infect . 
Dis . 
47:392 -- 400 Lammerding AM . 
2006 . 
Modeling and risk assessment for Salmonella in meat and poultry . 
J. AOAC Intl. 89:543 -- 52 Lange L. 2006 . 
FSIS overview of the CY05 broiler and ground poultry Salmonella data . 
Food Safety and Inspection Service . 
Advances in Post-Harvest Interventions to Reduce Salmonella in Poultry , Atlanta , GA , Feb. 23 . 
http://www.fsis.usda.gov/PDF/Slides_022306_Lange.pdf Liebana E , Garcia-Migura L , Breslin MF , Davies RH , Woodward MJ . 
2001 . 
Diversity of strains of Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis from English poultry farms assessed by multiple genetic ﬁngerprinting . 
J. Clin . 
Microbiol . 
39:154 -- 61 Lillard HS . 
1988 . 
Comparison of sampling methods and implications for bacterial decontamination of poultry carcasses by rinsing . 
J. Food Prot . 
51:405 -- 8 Lillard HS . 
1989 . 
Incidence and recovery of salmonellae and other bacteria from commercially processed poultry carcasses at selected pre - and post-evisceration sites . 
J. Food Prot . 
52:88 -- 91 Love BC , Rostagno MH . 
2008 . 
Comparison of ﬁve culture methods for Salmonella isolation from swine fecal samples of known infection status . 
J. Vet . 
Diagn . 
Invest . 
20:620 -- 24 
Luber P. 2009 . 
Cross-contamination versus undercooking of poultry meat or eggs -- which risks need to be managed ﬁrst ? 
Int . 
J. Food Microbiol . 
134:21 -- 28 Manfreda G , De Cesare A. 2005 . 
Campylobacter and Salmonella in poultry and poultry products : hows and whys of molecular typing . 
World 's Poult . 
Sci . 
J. 61:185 -- 97 McCrea BA , Macklin KS , Norton RA , Hess JB , Bilgili SF . 
2006 . 
A longitudinal study of Salmonella and Campylobacter jejuni isolates from day of hatch through processing by automated ribotyping . 
J. Food Prot . 
69:2908 -- 14 Mead GC . 
2007 . 
Microbiological Analysis of Red Meat , Poultry and Eggs . 
Cambridge , UK : Woodhead . 
348 pp . 
Mead GC , Lammerding AM , Cox NA , Doyle MP , Humbert F , et al. 2010 . 
Scientiﬁc and technical factors affecting the setting of Salmonella criteria for raw poultry : a global perspective . 
J. Food Prot . 
73:1566 -- 90 Mead PS , Slutsker L , Dietz V , McCraig LF , Bresee HS , et al. 1999 . 
Food-related illness and death in the United States . 
Emerg . 
Infect . 
Dis . 
5:607 -- 25 Mellor GE , Duffy LL , Dykes GA , Fegan N. 2010 . 
Relative prevalence of Salmonella Soﬁa on broiler chickens pre - and postprocessing in Australia . 
Poult . 
Sci . 
89:1544 -- 48 Mullner P , Jones G , Noble A , Spencer SEF , Hathaway S , French NP . 
2009 . 
Source attribution of food-borne zoonoses in New Zealand : a modiﬁed Hald model . 
Risk Anal . 
29:970 -- 84 Natl. Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods ( NACMCF ) . 
2004 . 
Response to questions posed by FSIS regarding performance standards with particular reference to broilers ( young chickens ) . 
http://www.fsis.usda.gov/OPHS/nacmcf/2004/NACMCF_broiler_4_13_04.pdf Natl. Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods ( NACMCF ) . 
2010 . 
Response to questions posed by the Food Safety and Inspection Service regarding determination of the most appropriate technologies for the Food Safety and Inspection Service to adopt in performing routine and baseline microbiological analyses . 
J. Food Prot . 
73:1160 -- 200 Natl. Res . 
Counc . 
( NRC ) . 
2009 . 
Letter report . 
Review of the Food Safety and Inspection Service proposed risk-based approach to and application of public-health attribution . 
Washington , DC : Natl. Acad . 
Press . 
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/12650.html O'Connor AM , Sargeant JM , Gardner IA , Dickson JS , Torrence ME , et al. 2010 . 
The REFLECT statement : methods and processes of creating reporting guidelines for randomized controlled trials for livestock and food safety . 
J. Food Prot . 
73:132 -- 39 Ogliari PJ , Franciso D , De Andrade DF , Pacheco JA , Franchin PR , Batista CRV . 
2007 . 
Statistical methodology for pathogen detection . 
J. Food Prot . 
70:1933 -- 36 Pires SM , Evers EG , Van Pelt W , Ayers T , Scallan E , et al. 2009 . 
Attributing the human disease burden of foodborne infections to speciﬁc sources . 
Foodborne Pathog . 
Dis . 
6:417 -- 24 Pires SM , Hald T. 2010 . 
Assessing the differences in public health impact of Salmonella subtypes using a Bayesian microbial subtyping approach for source attribution . 
Foodborne Pathog . 
Dis . 
7:143 -- 51 Pires SM , Vigre H , Makela P , Hald T. 2010 . 
Using outbreak data for source attribution of human salmonellosis and campylobacteriosis in Europe . 
Foodborne Pathog . 
Dis . 
http://www.liebertonline.com/ doi/pdf/10 .1089 / fpd .2010.0564 Pointon A , Sexton M , Dowsett P , Saputra T , Kiermeier A , et al. 2008 . 
A baseline survey of the microbiological quality of chicken portions and carcasses at retail in two Australian states ( 2005 to 2006 ) . 
J. Food Prot . 
71:1123 -- 34 Rasschaert G , Houf K , De Zutter L. 2006 . 
Impact of the slaughter line contamination on the presence of Salmonella on broiler carcasses . 
J. Appl . 
Microbiol . 
103:333 -- 41 Rasschaert G , Houf K , Godard C , Wildemauwe C , Pastuszczak-Frak M , De Zutter L. 2008 . 
Contamination of carcasses with Salmonella during poultry slaughter . 
J. Food Prot . 
71:146 -- 52 Rasschaert G , Houf K , Van Hende A , De Zutter L. 2007 . 
Investigation of the concurrent colonization with Campylobacter and Salmonella in poultry ﬂocks and assessment of the sampling site for status determination at slaughter . 
Vet . 
Microbiol . 
123:104 -- 9 Ravel A , Greig J , Tinga C , Todd E , Campbell G , et al. 2009 . 
Exploring historical Canadian foodborne outbreak data sets for human illness attribution . 
J. Food Prot . 
72:1963 -- 76 Ravel A , Smolina E , Sargeant JM , Cook A , Marshall B , et al. 2010 . 
Seasonality in human salmonellosis : assessment of human activities and chicken contamination as driving factors . 
Foodborne Pathog . 
Dis . 
7:785 -- 94 
Rostagno MH , Gailey JK , Hurd HS , McKean JD , Leite RC . 
2005 . 
Culture methods differ on the isolation of Salmonella enteric serotypes from naturally contaminated swine fecal samples . 
J. Vet . 
Diagn . 
Invest . 
17:80 -- 83 Sahlstrom L , Aspan A , Bagge E , Danielsson-Tham ML , Albihn A. 2004 . 
Bacterial pathogen incidences in sludge from Swedish sewage treatment plants . 
Water Res . 
38:1989 -- 94 Sahlstrom L , De Jong B , Aspan A. 2006 . 
Salmonella isolated in sewage sludge traced back to human cases of salmonellosis . 
Lett . 
Appl . 
Microbiol . 
43:46 -- 52 Sargeant JM , Saint-Onge J , Valcour J , Thompson A , Elgie R , et al. 2009 . 
Quality of reporting in clinical trials of preharvest food safety interventions and associations with treatment effect . 
Foodborne Pathog . 
Dis . 
6:989 -- 99 Sarlin LL , Barnhart ET , Caldwell DJ , Moore RW , Byrd JA , et al. 1998 . 
Evaluation of alternative sampling methods for Salmonella critical control point determination at broiler processing . 
Poult . 
Sci . 
77:1253 -- 57 Sarwari AR , Magder LS , Levine P , McNamara AM , Knower S , et al. 2001 . 
Serotype distribution of Salmonella isolates from food animals after slaughter differs from that of isolates found in humans . 
J. Infect . 
Dis . 
183:1295 -- 99 SAS Inst . 
Inc. 1999 . 
SAS Procedures Guide , Version 8 . 
Cary , NC : SAS Inst . 
Inc. . 
Schlosser W , Hogue A , Ebel E , Rose B , Umholtz R , et al. 2000 . 
Analysis of Salmonella serotypes from selected carcasses and raw ground products sampled prior to implementation of the pathogen reduction ; hazard analysis and critical control point ﬁnal rule in the US . 
Int . 
J. Food Microbiol . 
58:107 -- 11 Simmons M , Fletcher DL , Berrang ME , Cason JA . 
2003a . 
Comparison of sampling methods for the detection of Salmonella on whole broiler carcasses purchased from retail outlets . 
J. Food Prot . 
66:1768 -- 70 Simmons M , Fletcher DL , Cason JA , Berrang ME . 
2003b . 
Recovery of Salmonella from retail broilers by a whole-carcass enrichment procedure . 
J. Food Prot . 
66:446 -- 50 Singer RS , Cox LA Jr , Dickson JS , Hurd HS , Phillips I , Miller GY . 
2007 . 
Modeling the relationship between food animal health and human foodborne illness . 
Prev . 
Vet . 
Med . 
79:186 -- 203 Singer RS , Mayer AE , Hanson TE , Isaacson RE . 
2009 . 
Do microbial interactions and cultivation media decrease the accuracy of Salmonella surveillance systems and outbreak investigations ? 
J. Food Prot . 
72:707 -- 13 Stevens MP , Humphrey TJ , Maskell DJ . 
2009 . 
Molecular insights into farm animal and zoonotic Salmonella infections . 
Philos . 
Trans . 
R. Soc . 
B 364:2709 -- 23 Straver JM , Janssen AFW , Linnemann AR , van Boekel MAJS , Beumer RR , Zwietering MH . 
2007 . 
Number of Salmonella on chicken breast ﬁlet at retail level and its implications for public health risk . 
J. Food Prot . 
70:2045 -- 55 Sumner J , Raven G , Givney R. 2003 . 
Which food categories cause salmonellosis in Australia ? 
Food Aust . 
55:597 -- 601 Sumner J , Raven G , Givney R. 2004 . 
Have changes to meat and poultry food safety regulation in Australia affected the prevalence of Salmonella or of salmonellosis ? 
Int . 
J. Food Microbiol . 
92:199 -- 205 Surkiewicz BF , Johnston RW , Moran AB , Krumm GW . 
1969 . 
A bacteriological survey of chicken eviscerating plants . 
Food Technol . 
23:80 -- 85 Temelli S , Eyigor A , Carli KT . 
2010 . 
Salmonella serogroup detection in poultry meat samples by examining multiple colonies from selective plates of two standard culture methods . 
Foodborne Pathog . 
Dis . 
doi :10.1089 / fpd .2010.0570 . 
http://www.liebertonline.com/doi/pdfplus/10.1089/fpd.2010.0570 Todd ECD . 
2004 . 
Microbiological safety standards and public health goals to reduce foodborne disease . 
Meat Sci . 
66:33 -- 43 USDA/FSIS . 
1996a . 
Nationwide broiler chicken microbiological baseline data collection program , July 1994 -- June 1995 . 
Washington , DC . 
http://www.fsis.usda.gov/OPHS/baseline/contents.htm USDA/FSIS . 
1996b . 
Pathogen reduction ; hazard analysis and critical control point ( HACCP ) systems ; ﬁnal rule . 
Fed . 
Regist . 
61:38806 -- 989 USDA/FSIS . 
2008 . 
Improvements for poultry slaughter inspection . 
Appendix A -- Public Health Attribution and Performance Measures Methods . 
http://www.fsis.usda.gov/OPPDE/NACMPI/Feb2008/ Slaughter_Appendix_A.pdf USDA/FSIS . 
2009 . 
Quarterly results for serotyping of salmonellae from meat and poultry products , January -- December 2008 . 
http://www.fsis.usda.gov/PDF/Q1-4_2008_Salmonella_Serotype_Results.pdf 
USDA/FSIS . 
2010 . 
Progress report on Salmonella testing of raw meat and poultry products , 1998 -- 2009 . 
http://www.fsis.usda.gov/PDF/Progress_Report_Salmonella_Testing.pdf US FDA . 
2010 . 
NARMS retail meat annual report , 2002 -- 2007 . 
http://www.fda.gov/AnimalVeterinary/ SafetyHealth/AntimicrobialResistance/NationalAntimicrobialResistanceMonitoringSystem / ucm059103.htm Uyttendaele M , Baert K , Grijspeerdt K , De Zutter L , Horion B , et al. 2009 . 
Comparing the effect of various contamination levels for Salmonella in chicken meat preparations on the probability of illness in Belgium . 
J. Food Prot . 
72:2093 -- 105 Van Asselt ED , Thissen JTNM , van der Fels-Klerx HJ . 
2009 . 
Salmonella serotype distribution in the Dutch broiler supply chain . 
Poult . 
Sci . 
88:2695 -- 701 Van de Giessen AW , Bouwknegt M , Dam-Deisz WDC , van Pelt W , Wannet WJB , Visser G. 2006 . 
Surveillance of Salmonella spp . 
and Campylobacter spp . 
in poultry production ﬂocks in The Netherlands . 
Epidemiol . 
Infect . 
134:1266 -- 75 van der Fels-Klerx HJ , Jacobs-Reitsma WF , van Brake R , van der Voet R , Van Asselt ED . 
2008a . 
Prevalence of Salmonella in the broiler supply chain in The Netherlands . 
J. Food Prot . 
71:1974 -- 80 Van Hoorebeke S , Van Immerseel F , De Vylder J , Ducatelle R , Haesebrouck F , et al. 2009 . 
Faecal sampling underestimates the actual prevalence of Salmonella in laying hen ﬂocks . 
Zoonoses Public Health 56:471 -- 76 Van Pelt W , van der Zee H , Wannet WJB , Van de Giessen AW , Mevius DJ , et al. 2003 . 
Explosive increase of Salmonella Java in poultry in The Netherlands : consequences for public health . 
Euro Surveill . 
8:31 -- 35 Vassiliadis P. 1983 . 
The Rappaport-Vassiliadis ( RV ) enrichment medium for the isolation of salmonellas : an overview . 
J. Appl . 
Bacteriol . 
54:69 -- 76 Volkova VV , Bailey RH , Rybolt ML , Dazo-Galarneau K , Hubbard SA , et al. 2009 . 
Inter-relationships of Salmonella status of ﬂock and grow-out environment at sequential segments in broiler production and processing . 
Zoonoses Public Health . 
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1863-2378.2009.01263.x/pdf Voogt N , Nagelkerke NJD , Van de Giessen AW , Henken AM . 
2002a . 
Differences between reference laboratories of the European community in their ability to detect Salmonella species . 
Eur . 
J. Clin . 
Microbiol . 
Infect . 
Dis . 
21:449 -- 54 Voogt N , Wannet WJB , Nagelkerke NJD , Henken AM . 
2002b . 
Differences between national reference laboratories of the European community in their ability to serotype Salmonella species . 
Eur . 
J. Clin . 
Microbiol . 
Infect . 
Dis . 
21:204 -- 8 Waltman WD , Mallinson ET . 
1995 . 
Isolation of Salmonella from poultry tissue and environmental samples : a nationwide survey . 
Avian Dis . 
39:45 -- 54 Weinberger M , Andorn N , Agmon V , Cohen D , Shohat T , Pitlik SD . 
2004 . 
Blood invasiveness of Salmonella enterica as a function of age and serotype . 
Epidemiol . 
Infect . 
132:1023 -- 28 Whyte P , McGill K , Collins JD , Gormley E. 2002 . 
The prevalence and PCR detection of Salmonella contamination in raw poultry . 
Vet . 
Microbiol . 
89:53 -- 60 World Health Organ . 
( WHO ) . 
2002 . 
Risk assessments of Salmonella in eggs and broiler chickens . 
WHO/FAO/UN , Geneva , Switz . 
http://www.fao.org/docrep/005/y4392e/y4392e00.htm Zhao P , Zhao T , Doyle MP , Rubino JR , Meng J. 1998 . 
Development of a model for evaluation of microbial cross-contamination in the kitchen . 
J. Food Prot . 
61:960 -- 63 
An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Food Science and Technology articles may be found at http://food.annualreviews.org