Salmonella evasion of the host caspase-1
Edited by Ralph R. Isberg , Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Tufts University review June 2 , 2011 ) Sensing and adapting to the environment is one strategy by which bacteria attempt to maximize ﬁtness in an unpredictable world ; another is the stochastic generation of phenotypically distinct subgroups within a genetically clonal population . 
In culture , Sal-monella Typhimurium populations are bistable for the expression of ﬂagellin . 
We report that YdiV controls this expression pattern by preventing transcription of the sigma factor that recruits RNA polymerase to the ﬂagellin promoter . 
Bistability ensues when the sigma factor is repressed in a subpopulation of cells , resulting in two phenotypes : ﬂagellin expressors and ﬂagellin nonexpressors . 
Although the ability to swim is presumably a critical survival trait , ﬂagellin activates eukaryotic defense pathways , and Salmonella restrict the production of ﬂagellin during systemic infection . 
Sal-monella mutants lacking YdiV are unable to fully repress ﬂagellin at systemic sites , rendering them vulnerable to caspase-1 mediated colonization restriction . 
Thus , a regulatory mechanism producing bistability also impacts Salmonella virulence . 
Mary K. Stewarta, Lisa A. Cummingsb, Matthew L. Johnsonb, Alex B. Berezowa, and Brad T. Cooksona,b,1
Departments of aMicrobiology and bLaboratory Medicine , University of Washington , Seattle , WA 98195 hool of Medicine , Boston , MA , and approved November 4 , 2011 ( received for pathogenicity island 1 ( SPI-1 ) type III secretion system ( 8 ) . 
Mac-rophages interpret intracytosolic ﬂagellin as a danger signal , and initiate the proinﬂammatory cell death program pyroptosis in response ( 9 , 10 ) . 
Pyroptosis depends on expression of caspase-1 and is characterized by the maturation and release of the proin-ﬂammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18 and lysis of the macrophage . 
Mice deﬁcient in caspase-1 , IL-1β , or IL-18 are more susceptible to systemic Salmonella infection than WT mice , underscoring the importance of this pathway to host resistance ( 11 , 12 ) . 
Therefore , the down-regulation of ﬂagellin in systemic tissues may prevent host cell death and inﬂammation . 
In many bacterial species , motility is regulated by GGDEF and EAL domain proteins ( 13 ) . 
We hypothesized that members of this protein family would regulate Salmonella ﬂagellar genes in vivo . 
Here we show that an EAL-like protein , YdiV , represses ﬂiC transcription in a subpopulation of cells in culture , producing bistability . 
YdiV also represses ﬂagellar genes in systemic tissues , thereby protecting Salmonella from caspase-1 -- mediated bacterial clearance . 
We demonstrate that ydiV controls phenotypic heterogeneity in vitro and in vivo and modulates Salmonella virulence . 
Results
EAL-Like Protein YdiV Suppresses the Inﬂammatory Capacity of Salmonella . 
PFAM ( 14 ) and homology searches were used to identify the full complement of genes encoding GGDEF and EAL domain proteins in Salmonella ( Fig . 
S1 and SI Materials and Methods ) . 
A targeted deletion was constructed in each gene , yielding a panel of 22 mutant strains . 
To identify GGDEF and EAL domain proteins that control Salmonella interactions with host phagocytes , murine bone marrow-derived macrophages were infected with individual mutants , and macrophage lysis was measured by lactate dehydrogenase release . 
We hypothesized that this screen would enable us to identify mutants with altered virulence . 
Twenty-one of the mutations had no effect on the ability of the bacteria to kill macrophages , but deletion of ydiV signiﬁcantly increased the cytotoxicity of Salmonella ( Fig. 1A ) . 
ΔydiV is on average 2.16 times more cytotoxic than WT , as noted by Hisert et al. ( 15 ) . 
Enhanced killing by ΔydiV was accompanied by accelerated release of mature IL-1β , an endogenous substrate of caspase-1 , into the supernatant ( Fig. 1B ) . 
After 20 min , ΔydiVinfected macrophages released 6.2-fold more mature IL-1β into the supernatant than WT-infected macrophages as determined by densitometry ( Fig. 1B ) . 
Release of mature IL-1β by macro-phages was dependent on caspase-1 ( Fig . 
S2 ) . 
Author contributions : M.K.S. and B.T.C. designed research ; M.K.S. , L.A.C. , and M.L.J. performed research ; M.K.S. , and A.B.B. contributed new reagents/analytic tools ; M.K.S. and B.T.C. analyzed data ; and M.K.S. and B.T.C. wrote the paper . 
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: cookson@u.washington.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10 . 
1073/pnas .1108963108 / - / DCSupplemental . 
results demonstrate that YdiV represses ﬂiC , and that the overproduction of ﬂagellin by ΔydiV stimulates macrophage pyroptosis and cytokine production . 
YdiV Controls the Heterogeneity of ﬂiA Transcription . 
Transcription of ﬂiC in WT Salmonella is bistable ( 3 ) . 
To evaluate whether YdiV regulates bistability , ﬂiC transcription was examined in single cells using a chromosomally integrated reporter construct in which expression of GFP was driven from the ﬂiC promoter ( PﬂiC : : gfp ) . 
This test revealed that the overexpression of FliC observed on Western blot analysis was due to a dramatic increase in the percentage of the bacterial population transcribing ﬂiC in ΔydiV cultures ( Fig. 2 A and B ) . 
In contrast to WT , ΔydiV cultures were unimodally ﬂiC-ON ; the average percentage of ﬂiC-ON was 61.24 % for WT and 91.44 % for ΔydiV ( P = 7.8 × 10 − 10 ) . 
Deletion of ydiV removed the persistently ﬂiC-OFF subpopulation . 
To test whether complementation could reconstitute ﬂiC bistability in the ΔydiV mutant , ydiV was cloned downstream of an arabinose-inducible promoter . 
Low concentrations of inducer restored a ﬂiC-OFF population to the ΔydiV PﬂiC : : gfp strain ; at the highest concentration of inducer , ﬂiC transcription was reduced below the level of detection in most cells ( Fig. 2C ) . 
We conclude that YdiV represses ﬂiC expression , and that a YdiV-directed process occurring in a subpopulation of cells produces bistability of ﬂiC transcription . 
Products of the class I operon ﬂhDC activate transcription of class II operons ( Fig. 3A ) . 
The class II gene ﬂiA encodes σ28 , which activates transcription of ﬂiC and other class III genes . 
PﬂhDC : : gfp , a transcriptional reporter construct in which GFP expression is driven from the class I promoter , was used to investigate whether YdiV controls ﬂagellar gene expression from the top of the regulatory cascade ( Fig. 3A ) . 
The mean ﬂuorescent intensities ( MFIs ) of WT and ΔydiV populations harboring this reporter were averaged over 10 trials per strain . 
These average MFIs did not differ signiﬁcantly between the strains ( Fig. 3B ) , indicating that YdiV does not regulate ﬂhDC transcription . 
A ﬂhD-lacZ translational reporter fusion revealed that the ﬂhDC mRNA is translated equally by the WT and ΔydiV strains ( Fig. 3C ) . 
The FlhD4C2 complex is posttranslationally regulated by proteolytic degradation . 
To examine whether YdiV regulates this process , a 3 × FLAG epitope tag fused to the C terminus of FlhC was used to compare the amount of a master ﬂagellar regulatory protein in the ΔydiV and WT backgrounds ( Fig. 3D ) . 
Western blot analysis revealed that ΔydiV cultures contained similar amounts of FlhC : :3 × FLAG as WT cultures ( Fig. 3D ) , demonstrating that YdiV does not reduce ﬂiC expression by degrading FlhD4C2 . 
Wada et al. ( 16 ) showed that YdiV can bind to FlhD and prevent FlhD4C2 from binding the ﬂiA promoter , thereby inhibiting ﬂiA transcription . 
Thus , we hypothesized that YdiV might initiate phenotypic heterogeneity in ﬂagellar gene expression by directly repressing ﬂiA ; this heterogeneity could then be transmitted down through the ﬂagellar gene cascade to ﬂiC . 
To test this hypothesis , we used a transcriptional reporter construct in which GFP expression was driven from the ﬂiA promoter ( Fig. 3E ) . 
The ﬂiA transcriptional distributions of WT populations were bistable , with distinct peaks of ﬂiA-OFF and ﬂiA-ON cells . 
However , in the ΔydiV strain , most cells were transcribing ﬂiA ; the average percentage of ﬂiA-ON was − 17 55.51 % for WT and 87.03 % for ΔydiV ( P = 8.4 × 10 ) . 
Thus , the transcriptional proﬁles of ﬂiA in WT and ΔydiV closely mirrored those of ﬂiC in the two backgrounds . 
We conclude that in WT Salmonella , YdiV prevents activation of ﬂiA transcription in a subpopulation of cells . 
Because FliA is required for ﬂiC expression , this repression causes bistability in the transcription of ﬂiC . 
YdiV Represses ﬂiC Transcription in Vivo . 
Salmonella living within macrophages require ClpXP protease , which degrades FlhD4C2 , to suppress ﬂiC transcription ( 3 , 17 ) . 
YdiV also posttranslationally regulates the ﬂagellar master regulatory proteins to repress ﬂiC dicating heightened activation of proinﬂammatory pathways and possibly pyroptotic cell death ( Fig. 5 A -- C ) . 
Activation of such mechanisms during colonization of systemic sites could promote bacterial clearance . 
If this were true , then we predicted that a ΔydiV ΔﬂiC mutant would outcompete the ΔydiV parent strain at systemic sites in the host . 
YdiV Protects Salmonella from Pyroptosis . 
We used a murine competitive infection model to assess the beneﬁt of YdiV-me-diated ﬂiC repression within systemic tissues . 
Orally introduced Salmonella initially colonize the gastrointestinal tract , then infect the Peyer 's patches ( 5 ) and mesenteric lymph nodes ( MLN ) , and ﬁnally travel through the blood and lymph to the spleen , liver , and other systemic sites ( 6 , 7 ) . 
When WT Salmonella was coinfected with its ΔﬂiC derivative , the two strains colonized the 
Discussion
of the class II gene ﬂiA . 
Intriguingly , Wada et al. observed that YdiV deterministically repressed ﬂagellar genes in response to nutritional cues . 
Based on those ﬁndings and our present observations , we conclude that YdiV controls both stochastic and deterministic gene expression , tuning ﬂagellar gene transcription in reponse to environmental signals . 
The ΔydiV mutant is attenuated compared with WT in oral ( average log10 CI , − 0.7588 ; P = 0.0258 ) as well as i.p. and i.v. ( 15 ) infections ( Fig . 
S3B ) . 
Intriguingly , the spread in our oral competition data demonstrates variation in the ability of ΔydiV to compete with WT in the deep tissues , which is consistent with the heterogeneity in ﬂiC expression that we observed in ΔydiV populations ex vivo ( Fig. 4 ) and the heterogeneity in the proin-ﬂammatory serum cytokine response that we found in mice infected with the ΔydiV mutant ( Fig. 5 A -- C ) . 
In fact , deletion of ydiV increased heterogeneity in vivo , in contrast to our in vitro results . 
The majority of bacteria isolated from both WT - and ΔydiV-infected mice were ﬂiC-OFF ( Fig. 4 ) , most likely due to other regulatory mechanisms that repress ﬂiC in systemic tissues . 
Indeed , we have previously shown that the protease ClpX represses ﬂiC expression in macrophages ( 3 ) . 
The presence of multiple mechanisms to ensure tight control of ﬂiC reﬂects the importance of maintaining the ﬂiC-OFF state in speciﬁc environments , including systemic tissues ( Fig. 5D ) . 
Genetic circuits that produce bistable patterns of gene expression often include positive feedback ( 1 ) , and ﬂiA is subject to two positive feedback loops ( Fig . 
S4 ) . 
The ﬁrst loop increases ﬂiA transcription by elevating the concentration of FlhD4C2 within the cell ( 19 ) . 
In the second loop , FliA ( σ28 ) directly recruits RNA polymerase to the ﬂiA promoter ( 20 ) . 
Because nonlinear gene expression dynamics are essential components of other bistable circuits ( 1 , 21 ) , one or both of these loops might produce an acceleration of ﬂiA transcription that could 
Materials and Methods Bacterial Strains , Plasmids and Culture Conditions . 
The strains used in this study are listed in Table S1 . 
As described previously , mutants were generated in the Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium 14028 background ( 28 ) , and ﬂiC and ﬂhDC GFP reporters were constructed ( 3 ) . 
The ﬂhD-lacZ single-copy chromosomal translational fusion ( 29 ) has the reporter fused to the ﬁrst 60 amino acids of FlhD . 
β-galactosidase activity was determined as described previously ( 30 ) , and is reported as ( activity units per A600 unit per mL of cell suspension ) × 2,000 , where activity units are μmol of ortho-nitrophenyl formed/min . 
The FlhC : :3 × FLAG tag fusion was a gift from the Rao laboratory ( 19 ) . 
The ﬂiA GFP reporter , pﬂiC , and pPBAD : : ydiV are described in SI Materials and Methods . 
Strains were grown in LB at 37 °C with aeration unless noted otherwise . 
Carbenicillin , kanamycin , and gentamicin were added at 100 , 50 , and 20 μg / mL , respectively . 
Mice . 
C57BL/6 WT mice ( Jackson Laboratories ) and Casp1 − / − mice ( a gift from R. Flavell , Yale University , New Haven , CT ) were housed under speciﬁc pathogen-free conditions in accordance with the University of Washington 's Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee guidelines . 
Competitive Infections . 
Bacteria were grown overnight in LB without aeration . 
Fasting mice received 106 of each strain orally in 200 μL of 5 % sodium bicarbonate/PBS . 
Organs were harvested at indicated time points . 
CIs were calculated as the output ratio of strain 1 to strain 2 divided by the input ratio of strain 1 to strain 2 ( 31 ) . 
All statistical tests were applied to the log10 of the CIs . 
A one-sample , two-tailed t test with a hypothetical mean of 0 was used to determine whether either strain demonstrated a signiﬁcant colonization advantage within the individual tissues . 
A two-sample , two-tailed t test was used to compare the results obtained in WT mice with those obtained in caspase-1 KO mice . 
GFP Expression ex Vivo . 
Fasting mice were orally gavaged with 106 bacteria in 200 μL of 5 % sodium bicarbonate/PBS . 
The mice received 2 mg/mL of am-picillin in their drinking water during the fast and throughout the course of infection to maintain reporter constructs ( 3 ) . 
Because the ability of ΔydiV to compete with WT is variable ( Fig . 
S3B ) , we harvested bacteria from mice at approximately the same stage of infection to evaluate gene expression by ΔydiV and WT bacteria that had replicated to similar numbers within the host . 
Mice were killed on days 4 and 5 , and bacteria from the spleens were analyzed as described previously ( 3 ) . 
Flow Cytometry . 
Exponential-phase bacteria were analyzed using a FACScan ﬂow cytometer ( BD Biosciences ) . 
Data were analyzed using FlowJo software ( TreeStar ) . 
Cytokines in processed blood ( see SI Materials and Methods for processing methods ) were measured on a FACSCanto ﬂow cytometer ( BD Biosciences ) using cytometric bead arrays ( BD 552364 and 560232 ) in accordance with the manufacturer 's instructions . 
Data were analyzed using FCAP Array software ( BD Biosciences ) . 
Given the variable ability of ΔydiV to compete with WT , we collected blood from infected mice on days 5 and 6 to evaluate host cytokine production in mice with similar levels of bacterial colonization . 
Macrophages . 
Bone marrow macrophages derived from C57BL/6 mice were isolated and cultured as described previously ( 9 ) . 
For macrophage infections , overnight bacterial cultures were diluted 1:15 and grown for 3 h , washed , and then resuspended in PBS . 
Bacteria were spun down onto macrophages at 200 × g for 10 min . 
Lactate dehydrogenase release was measured after a total of 90 min using the Promega CytoTox 96 Kit ( G1780 ) . 
Macrophages were seeded 2 × 104 per well in 96-well plates . 
Cytotoxicity was calculated as described previously ( 9 ) . 
Immunoblot Analysis . 
Western blot analyses were performed on exponentialphase bacterial cultures using standard techniques ( 3 ) and developed with Amersham ECL Western Blotting Detection Reagents . 
Anti-3 × FLAG antibody ( F3165 ; Sigma-Aldrich ) and anti-mouse HRP-antibody ( NA931 ; Amersham ) were used to detect the FlhC : :3 × FLAG fusion . 
IL-1β detection was 5 performed using 2 × 10 macrophages per well in 24-well plates ( SI Materials and Methods ) . 
Macrophages were treated overnight with 100 ng/mL of LPS and infected in media containing 5 mM glycine ( 9 ) . 
Bacteria were prepared as for the cytotoxicity experiments . 
Processed cytokine was detected using anti -- IL-1β antibody ( AF-401-NA ; R&D Systems ) and HRP-conjugated anti-goat antibody ( SC2350 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) . 
National Institutes of Health ImageJ version 1.63 was used to quantitate protein expression . 
17 . 
Tomoyasu T , Takaya A , Isogai E , Yamamoto T ( 2003 ) Turnover of FlhD and FlhC , master regulator proteins for Salmonella ﬂagellum biogenesis , by the ATP-dependent ClpXP protease . 
Mol Microbiol 48:443 -- 452 . 
18 . 
Simm R , Remminghorst U , Ahmad I , Zakikhany K , Römling U ( 2009 ) A role for the EAL-like protein STM1344 in regulation of CsgD expression and motility in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium . 
J Bacteriol 191:3928 -- 3937 . 
19 . 
Saini S , Brown JD , Aldridge PD , Rao CV ( 2008 ) FliZ Is a posttranslational activator of 
FlhD4C2-dependent ﬂagellar gene expression . 
J Bacteriol 190:4979 -- 4988 . 
20 . 
Ikebe T , Iyoda S , Kutsukake K ( 1999 ) Structure and expression of the ﬂiA operon of Salmonella typhimurium . 
Microbiology 145:1389 -- 1396 . 
21 . 
Dubnau D , Losick R ( 2006 ) Bistability in bacteria . 
Mol Microbiol 61:564 -- 572 . 
22 . 
Saini S , et al. ( 2010 ) FliZ induces a kinetic switch in ﬂagellar gene expression . 
J Bacteriol 192:6477 -- 6481 . 
23 . 
Miao EA , et al. ( 2010 ) Caspase-1 -- induced pyroptosis is an innate immune effector mechanism against intracellular bacteria . 
Nat Immunol 11:1136 -- 1142 . 
24 . 
Kapatral V , Minnich SA ( 1995 ) Co-ordinate , temperature-sensitive regulation of the three Yersinia enterocolitica ﬂagellin genes . 
Mol Microbiol 17:49 -- 56 . 
25 . 
Way SS , et al. ( 2004 ) Characterization of ﬂagellin expression and its role in Listeria monocytogenes infection and immunity . 
Cell Microbiol 6:235 -- 242 . 
26 . 
Tominaga A , Mahmoud MA , Mukaihara T , Enomoto M ( 1994 ) Molecular characterization of intact , but cryptic , ﬂagellin genes in the genus Shigella . 
Mol Microbiol 12 : 277 -- 285 . 
27 . 
Stecher B , et al. ( 2008 ) Motility allows S Typhimurium to beneﬁt from the mucosal defence . 
Cell Microbiol 10:1166 -- 1180 . 
28 . 
Datsenko KA , Wanner BL ( 2000 ) One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in Escherichia coli K-12 using PCR products . 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:6640 -- 6645 . 
29 . 
Ellermeier CD , Janakiraman A , Slauch JM ( 2002 ) Construction of targeted single copy lac fusions using λ Red and FLP-mediated site-speciﬁc recombination in bacteria . 
Gene 290:153 -- 161 . 
30 . 
Slauch JM , Silhavy TJ ( 1991 ) cis-acting ompF mutations that result in OmpR-de - 
31 . 
Beuzón CR , Holden DW ( 2001 ) Use of mixed infections with Salmonella strains to study virulence genes and their interactions in vivo . 
Microbes Infect 3:1345 -- 1352 . 
32 . 
Lawhon SD , et al. ( 2003 ) Global regulation by CsrA in Salmonella typhimurium . 
Mol Microbiol 48:1633 -- 1645 .