Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect 
Journal of Biotechnology 
journal homepage : www.elsevier.com/locate/jbiotec 
Short communication 
Engineered Salmonella allows real-time heterologous gene expression monitoring within infected zebraﬁsh embryos
Carlos Medina , Eduardo Santero , Jose Luis Gómez-Skarmeta , Jose Luis Royo ∗ 
Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo , Universidad Pablo de Olavide/Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas / Junta de Andalucía , Ctra . 
Utrera , Km 1 . 
41013-Sevilla , Spain 
a r t i c l e 
a b s t r a c t 
i n f o 
Microbial host -- pathogen interactions have been traditionally well studied at genetic and physiological levels , but cell-resolution analyses have been particularly scarce . 
This has been especially remarkable for intracellular parasites for two major reasons : ﬁrst , the inherent loss of bacteria traceability once infects its hosts ; second and more important , the limited availability of genetic tools that allow a tight regulated expression of bacterial virulence genes once inside the host tissues . 
Here we present novel data supporting the use of zebraﬁsh embryos to monitor Salmonella enterica serovar Thyphimurium infection . 
Intravenous infection of Salmonella can be easily monitored using in vivo ﬂuorescence that allows the visualization of free-swimming bacteria through the circulatory system . 
Moreover , we have engineered Salmonella to voluntarily activate heterologous gene expression at any point during infection once inside the zebraﬁsh macrophages using a salicylate-based expression system . 
This approach allows real-time cell-resolution in vivo monitoring of the infection . 
All together , this approach paves the road to cell-based hat w resolution experiments t ould be harder to mimic in other vertebrate infection models . 
© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved . 
Article history : 
Received 18 November 2011 Accepted 28 November 2011 Available online 8 December 2011 
Keywords : 
In vivo protein expression Salmonella pathogenesis Zebraﬁsh 
importance since it can induce gastroenteritis , enteric fever or bacteraemia that constitute a signiﬁcant economic loss of productive work-time ( Arnold et al. , 2007 ) . 
Besides the acute health problem , some studies have demonstrated that Salmonella infection increases the risk of developing inﬂammatory bowel diseases and other gastrointestinal disorders , including chronic inﬂammation and bladder cancer ( Bell , 2010 ) . 
Although many infection-related genes have been identiﬁed as virulence factors , functional studies addressing the role of the different genes in the distinct infection steps remain scarce . 
During the past years , murine models of infectious diseases have been the host of choice for analyzing host -- pathogen interactions during infection ( Duan et al. , 2009 ) . 
Unfortunately , once Salmonella is inside the mouse , the cellular resolution level is abolished ( Liu et al. , 2010 ) . 
An alternative approach to study Salmonella infection has relied on monolayer cell culture systems ( Lahti et al. , 2009 ) or 3D reconstructions of tissues which include polarized intestinal cell culture models ( Barrila et al. , 2010 ) , ileal loop models or spheroids ( Kasinskas and Forbes , 2007 ) . 
However , studying the interaction between the bacteria and the immune system requires a whole-organism infection . 
disease model has provided new information and insights into pathogenesis studies . 
The innate immune system of the zebraﬁsh Among the different bacterial pathogens , Salmonella spp . 
takes The emergence of the zebraﬁsh ( Danio rerio ) as infectious embryo starts developing during the ﬁrst day post-fertilization ( dpf ) . 
Differentiated myeloid cells invade the head mesenchyme tissue or join the blood circulation ( Herbomel et al. , 2001 ) showing speciﬁc adherence to other parasites such as mycobacteria injected into the blood which are rapidly phagocytised ( Davis et al. , 2002 ) . 
They are also able to sense the presence of bacteria injected into one of the closed body cavities and to respond by migration to the infection site ( Herbomel et al. , 1999 ) . 
Therefore , the zebraﬁsh embryo model is useful for determining the role of innate immunity in responses to different infectious agents , as it is uncoupled from adaptive immunity ( van der Sar et al. , 2006 ) . 
To date , some examples have highlighted the potential of zebraﬁsh for monitoring infections , given its transparency and rapid development ( van der Sar et al. , 2003 ) . 
Here we go one step forward , focusing our attention to the control of gene expression once the bacteria reside in the host . 
We have engineered the Salmonella with a salicylate-based expression system . 
Salicylate is innocuous to the zebraﬁsh at the given concentrations and diffuses across the different embryonic tissues to reach the intra-bacterial concentration necessary to trigger heterologous expression inside the macrophages . 
Here we present a proof of concept and demonstrate that we can voluntarily activate heterologous gene expression of Salmonella once inside the zebraﬁsh host . 
Strain , plasmid and growth conditions . 
Bacterial strains used in this work were grown aerobically at 180 rpm and 37 ◦ C in LB medium and supplemented when necessary with ampicillin ( 100 g/ml ) . 
S. Typhimurium MPO94 ( 14028 trg : : nahR/Psal -- xylS2/Ptac -- gfp ) , which contains the regulatory module 
∗ Corresponding author . 
Tel. : +34 954977445 . 
E-mail address : jlroysan@upo.es ( J.L. Royo ) . 
0168-1656 / $ -- see front matter © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved . 
doi :10.1016 / j.jbiotec .2011.11.022 
F injecte infection (B, C, D), and inside macrophages 24 hpi (E; 100×, F; 320×, G; 640×).
ig . 
1 . 
Salmonella detection by microscopy on infected zebraﬁsh . 
Salmonella was d in the axial vein ( A ) as described and visualized in the bloodstream early post 
has been previously described ( Medina et al. , 2011 ) . 
The regulatory module combines nahR with xylS2 under the control of the NahR-responsive Psal promoter integrated into Salmonella chromosome . 
The reporter gene is inserted into a separate expression module downstream of the XylS2-responsive Pm promoter , in the reporter plasmid pMPO1047 ( ApR ) , a pSC101-based expression vector containing a rrnBT1T2-Pm : : MCSII-dTomato fusion , translated from an optimized T7 Shine-Dalgarno sequence . 
The binding of salicylate to NahR and XylS2 activates the expression of genes controlled by the Psal and Pm promoters respectively ( Royo et al. , 2007 ) . 
obtained and maintained from our breeding colony under standard conditions according to previously established procedures ( http://zﬁn.org ) . 
Embryos for injection were obtained from crosses of wild-type AB/Tuebingen zebraﬁsh . 
Fertilized eggs were kept at 28 ◦ C in Petri dishes with 20 ml of aquarium water with 0.003 % 1-phenyl-2-thiourea to prevent pigmentation . 
Microinjection needles were manufactured from 1 mm diameter glass capillary ( inner diameter 0.58 mm ) ( A-M Systems Inc , Carlsborg , WA ) . 
Capillars where sharpened using a Suttere P97 puller according to manufacturer instructions . 
Zebraﬁsh care and embryo microinjection . 
Zebraﬁsh were 
Infection and heterologous gene expression . 
30 h post fertilization ( hpf ) embryos were anesthetized with 0.02 % tricaine and disposed on an agarose array . 
Needles were loaded with a bacterial suspension 2 of ≈ 5 × 10 cfu/nl . 
0.25 % Congo red was used as an injection tracer . 
Injection was performed in the axial vein using a Narishige miroinjector under conventional binocular . 
For each condition 50 -- 100 embryos where injected . 
Infected zebraﬁsh were kept ◦ at 28 C in Petri dishes with 20 ml of E3 medium with 0.003 % 1-phenyl-2-thiourea to prevent melanogenesis . 
For induction , 2 mM sodium salicylate was added to the Petri dish . 
Embryos were monitored under ﬂuorescence binocular for 48 h. Primary cell culture . 
Infected embryos where anesthetized and resuspended in 1 ml phosphate-buffered saline containing 0.25 % trypsin and incubated at 30 ◦ C for 15 min . 
Cells where homogenized with gentle pippetting and deposited on Petri dishes with DMEM supplemented with 10 % foetal bovine serum and 100 g/ml gentamicin , which precluded de novo re-infection while culturing . 
Cells where let to ◦ attach for 30 min at 30 C. Supernatant was aspired and replaced by new medium . 
Live imaging . 
For zebraﬁsh live imaging , embryos were anesthetized and placed under an inverted ﬂuorescence microscope ( Leica Systems ) . 
Excitation of ﬁlters used where = 546/12 nm fo 
Tomato ﬂuorescence , and = 470/40 nm for GFP . 
Pictures and video where taken with LAS Multi-Time Module and further edited with Image J freeware and iMovie 7.1.4 ( 585 ) software , respectively . 
from the bacterial chromosome under the control of Ptac promoter has been previously reported to track Salmonella during infection of HeLa cells ( Medina et al. , 2011 ) . 
In order to assay the in vivo visualization of infection , we injected the axial vein of 30 hpf zebraﬁsh embryos with ≈ 103 cfu , as stated above . 
Successful injections were visible when Congo red staining perfunded the blood stream . 
A few minutes upon injection we could easily detect free bacteria in the circulatory system . 
This was particular evident in the caudal vein , the dorsal aorta and other capillars irrigating the head ( Fig. 1A -- D , Supp Video 1 ) . 
Between 2 and 5 h post infection ( hpi ) , most freely swimming bacteria were phagocyted . 
This was observed while either circulating through the caudal vein or immobilized in other The MPO94 strain containing the GFP constitutively expressed peripheral vessels . 
Under ﬂuorescence microscope , 10 -- 20 of these macrophages containing bacteria where visualized and recorded 24 hpi ( Fig. 1E -- G ) . 
Next , we wanted to assay whether we could trigger heterologous expression in those bacteria once they lie inside macrophages . 
Initial characterization of the salycilate-dependent expression system in bacterial cultures indicated that maximum activation of the expression system was obtained with 2 -- 4 mM salycilate . 
This inducer concentration was found to be completely innocuous to the zebraﬁsh embryos , and did not affect their development or behaviour ( data not shown ) . 
Thus , a strain of Salmonella containing the GFP constitutively expressed from the chromosome , and the dTomato ﬂuorescent protein in a plasmid under the control of the Pm promoter , was used to infect the zebraﬁsh embryos . 
After parenteral administration , zebraﬁsh were incubated at 28 ◦ C and the infection was allowed to proceed . 
When phagocytosis was detected , embryos where split in two plates containing E3 media with or without 2 mM salycilate . 
After 4 h , we could detect de novo dTomato expression inside the phagocyted bacteria under induced conditions ( Fig. 2 ) . 
This demonstrates that the intracellular concentration of salycilate in the macrophages was sufﬁcient to trigger heterologous bacterial gene expression once inside the cell cytoplasm . 
isolated to perform further single-cell resolution studies . 
To that end infected 48 hpf embryos where sacriﬁced and cell suspensions were generated . 
Cell suspensions where incubated in Petri dishes with DMEM medium ◦ remaining medium was aspirated and replaced by new one and examined under microscope . 
We could detect a high percentage of cells attached to the cell surface , some of them harbouring GFP + Salmonella inside them ( Fig. 3 ) . 
Thus , using this procedure , infection can be monitored ex vivo by following Salmonella replication and the ﬁnal death of the eukaryotic cell . 
zebraﬁsh embryos to monitor Salmonella thyphimurium infection . 
Intravenous administration of Salmonella can be easily monitored using in vivo ﬂuorescence that allows the visualization of free-swimming bacteria throughout the circulatory system . 
However , to date no regulated expression have been tested in intracellular parasites using zebraﬁsh as host . 
Most systems used in biotechnology are not suitable for studies involving bacterial behaviour inside mammalian cells . 
In fact , several in vivo prokaryotic inducible expression systems used that respond to external stimuli , such as the tetracycline responsive bacterial tetracycline repressor , are limited for studying host -- pathogen interactions because of its toxicity , inducer side effects or promoter leakiness . 
Here we have demonstrated that we can trigger heterologous expression from the bacterial Pm promoter once it lies inside the macrophages when salycilate is dispensed in the aquarium water . 
We propose that this approach could be a valuable tool for future experiments , paving the road to cell-based experiments that would be hard to mimic in mice . 
Finally , we assayed whether infected macrophages could be at 30 C as described above . 
After 1 h , the Altogether , here we present novel data supporting the use of 
415 
protein and a 640 × magniﬁcation of bacteria inside macrophages . 
ig . 
2 . 
Inducible intracellular expression of dTomato protein . 
Fishes were injected w lmonella MPO94 harbouring pMPO1047 plasmid . 
Infection was allowed to proceed rior to split them on plates containing ( E -- I ) or not ( A -- D ) salicylate . 
Left to right s show phase contrast , constitutively expressed GFP , salicylate-induced dTomato 
F ith Sa p panel 
Fig. 3 . 
Macrophages isolated from ﬁshes . 
Fishes were sacriﬁced and a cell suspension was prepared by trypsin treatment to obtain isolated macrophages from plates containing ( A -- D ) or not ( E -- H ) salicylate . 
Left to right panels show phase contrast , constitutively expressed GFP , salicylate-induced dTomato protein and merged images 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Acknowledgements
zebraﬁsh handle and embryo source . 
This work was funded We have to thank Yolanda Roncero and Carmen Hidalgo for by grants BFU2010-14839 , CSD2007-00008 , CSD2007-00005 and Proyectos de Excelencia CVI-3488 and P07-CVI-02518 from the Spanish and Andalusian Governments , respectively . 
Jose Luis Royo holds a JAE DOC contract from the Spanish National Research Council ( CSIC ) . 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found , in the online version , at doi :10.1016 / j.jbiotec .2011.11.022 . 
References 
Arnold , D.L. , Jackson , R.W. , Waterﬁeld , N.R. , Mansﬁeld , J.W. , 2007 . 
Evolution of microbial virulence : the beneﬁts of stress . 
Trends Genet . 
23 ( 6 ) , 293 -- 300 . 
Barrila , J. , et al. , 2010 . 
Organotypic 3D cell culture models : using the rotating wall vessel to study host -- pathogen interactions . 
Nat . 
Rev. Microbiol . 
8 ( 11 ) , 791 -- 801 . 
Bell , G. , 2010 . 
Fluctuating selection : the perpetual renewal of adaptation in variable environments . 
Philos . 
Trans . 
R. Soc . 
Lond . 
B Biol . 
Sci . 
365 ( 1537 ) , 87 -- 97 . 
Davis , J.M. , et al. , 2002 . 
Real-time visualization of mycobacterium-macrophage interactions leading to initiation of granuloma formation in zebraﬁsh embryos . 
Immunity 17 ( 6 ) , 693 -- 702 . 
Duan , Y. , et al. , 2009 . 
Complete genome sequence of citrus huanglongbing bacterium , ` Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus ' obtained through metagenomics . 
Mol . 
Plant Microbe Interact . 
22 ( 8 ) , 1011 -- 1020 . 
Herbomel , P. , Thisse , B. , Thisse , C. , 1999 . 
Ontogeny and behaviour of early macrophages in the zebraﬁsh embryo . 
Development 126 ( 17 ) , 3735 -- 3745 . 
Herbomel , P. , Thisse , B. , Thisse , C. , 2001 . 
Zebraﬁsh early macrophages colonize cephalic mesenchyme and developing brain , retina , and epidermis through a M-CSF receptor-dependent invasive process . 
Dev . 
Biol . 
238 ( 2 ) , 274 -- 288 . 
Kasinskas , R.W. , Forbes , N.S. , 2007 . 
Salmonella typhimurium lacking ribose chemoreceptors localize in tumor quiescence and induce apoptosis . 
Cancer Res . 
67 ( 7 ) , 3201 -- 3209 . 
Lahti , D.C. , 2009 . 
Relaxed selection in the wild . 
Trends Ecol . 
Evol . 
24 ( 9 ) , 487 -- 496 . 
Liu , X. , Lu , R. , Xia , Y. , Sun , J. , 2010 . 
Global analysis of the eukaryotic pathways and networks regulated by Salmonella typhimurium in mouse intestinal infection in vivo . 
BMC Genomics 11 , 722 . 
Medina , C. , et al. , 2011 . 
Improved expression systems for regulated expression in Salmonella infecting eukaryotic cells . 
PLoS One 6 ( 8 ) , e23055 . 
Royo , J.L. , et al. , 2007 . 
In vivo gene regulation in Salmonella spp . 
by a salicylate-dependent control circuit . 
Nat . 
Methods 4 ( 11 ) , 937 -- 942 . 
van der Sar , A.M. , 2003 . 
Zebraﬁsh embryos as a model host for the real time analysis of Salmonella typhimurium infections . 
Cell Microbiol . 
5 ( 9 ) , 601 -- 611 . 
van der Sar , A.M. , et al. , 2006 . 
MyD88 innate immune function in a zebraﬁsh embryo infection model . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
74 ( 4 ) , 2436 -- 2441