eview
Salmonella enterica is an invasive , facultative intracellular gastrointestinal pathogen causing human diseases such as gastroenteritis and typhoid fever . 
Virulence-attenuated strains of this pathogen have interesting capacities for the generation of live vaccines . 
Attenuated live typhoidal and nontyphoidal Salmonella strains can be used for vaccination against Salmonella infections and to target tumor tissue . 
Such strains may also serve as live carriers for the development of vaccination strategies against other bacterial , viral or parasitic pathogens . 
Various strategies have been developed to deploy regulatory circuits and protein secretion systems for efficient expression and delivery of foreign antigens by Salmonella carrier strains . 
One prominent example is the use of type III secretion systems to translocate recombinant antigens into antigen presenting cells . 
In this review , we will describe the recent developments in strategies that utilize live attenuated Salmonella as vaccine carriers for prophylactic vaccination against infectious diseases and therapeutic vaccination against tumors . 
Considerations for generating safe , attenuated carrier strains , designing stable expression systems and the use of adjuvants for live carrier strategies are discussed . 
Intracellular bacteria as a live vaccine carrier
Intracellular bacteria have evolved lifestyles in close interaction with eukaryotic host cells . 
Obligate intracellular bacteria including patho-genic bacteria such as Chlamydia spp . 
or Rickettsia spp . 
can not survive outside the host cell . 
By contrast , facultative intracellular bacteria can grow and replicate within the infected host cells as well as extracellularly , and comprise , among many others , species of the genera Mycobacteria , Listeria , Legionella , Brucella or Salmonella . 
Many of these facultative intracellular pathogens have been utilized as live carriers for new vaccination strategies . 
The applications include the use of live attenuated pathogens to display heterologous antigens to the immune system of the vaccinee , to translocate foreign protein antigens in specific populations of immune cells , or the use as carrier strains for DNA vaccination . 
Because of the invasive properties and their capability to access the host cell cytosol , intracellular bacteria have been employed in specific targeting of DNA vaccine vectors to professional antigen-presenting cells ( APCs ) [ 1 ] . 
Several earlier studies have shown that the delivery of DNA vaccines by several attenuated intracellular bacteria is a promising method of vaccination [ 2,3 ] . 
An important strategy for delivery of recombinant protein antigens into APCs is the use of type III secretion systems of pathogenic bacteria as first demonstrated for Salmonella enterica [ 4 ] and subsequently applied to other carriers ( reviewed in [ 5 ] ) . 
The translocation approach appears also very effective and versatile in combination with Salmonella as a live attenuated carrier and will be discussed in detail in this review . 
Live attenuated Salmonella strains also show interesting properties in targeting tumor tissues and in directing immune responses against tumor cells . 
We will focus on recent developments in therapeutic vaccination using Salmonella . 
Salmonella virulence & immunity to Salmonella Pathogenesis of infectious diseases by Salmonella Salmonellae are Gram-negative , facultative anaerobic , motile , nonlactose fermenting rods belonging to the family of Enterobacteriaceae . 
The genus comprises the two species S. enterica and Salmonella bongori , the latter being considered as the phylogenetical older species [ 6 ] . 
S. enterica is classified into seven subspecies and further characterization was done by typing of their somatic ( O ) , capsular ( K ) and flagellar ( H ) antigens , with more than 2500 serovars being identified . 
Salmonella infects humans and animals generally by the orofecal route . 
While some Salmonella species are restricted to one or few host spe-cies , others have a wider host spectrum . 
Very diverse disease outcomes following S. enterica infection can be observed with human diseases ranging from a usually mild , self-limiting gastroenteritis , caused mainly by S. enterica serovars Typhimurium ( S. typhimurium ) and Enteritidis ( S. enteritidis ) , to the severe , systemic infection termed typhoid fever caused by S. enterica serovar Typhi ( S. typhi ) or Paratyphi ( S. paratyphi ) . 
Salmonellosis is more prevalent in developing parts of the world [ 7 ] . 
Typhoid fever is an acute , life-threatening febrile illness with 16 million -- 33 million cases and 500,000 -- 600,000 deaths every year according to WHO reports . 
These studies conservatively estimated 22 million cases and 216,000 related deaths in 2000 [ 7,8 ] . 
Several clusters of virulence genes are important for the adhesion to specific cell types of the mucosa , the invasion of enterocytes and for the triggering of fluid secretion leading to the diarrheal symptoms . 
Pathogenesis of Salmonella depends on its ability to survive and replicate inside host cells . 
This virulence trait is linked to the ability to cause systemic infections [ 9 ] . 
A large number of genes are required to enable Salmonella to cope with nutritional limitations ( aro , pur ) and to avoid clearance by the host immune system . 
Further virulence factors enable Salmonella to avoid or survive damage by antimicrobial peptides and radicals [ 10 ] . 
For experimental studies , S. typhimurium has proven to be a useful model organism , as it is a genetically amenable pathogen and provides a mouse model with systemic infections reminiscent of typhoid fever in humans ( for recent reviews on Salmonella pathogenesis , see [ 10 ] ) . 
Type III secretion systems
Type III secretion systems ( T3SS ) are specialized molecular machines of Gram-negative bacterial pathogens that deliver effector proteins to host cell membranes and cytosol [ 11 ] . 
T3SS fulfill distinct functions that include antiphagocytic and cytotoxic effects on host cells ( Ysc/Yop system of Yersinia spp . ) 
, invasion of host cells ( S. enterica SPI1 system , Shigella spp . 
Mxi/Spa system ) and intracellular pathogenesis ( S. enterica SPI2 system , Chlamydia spp . 
T3SS ) [ 12 ] . 
T3SS consist of at least 20 different subunits , which enable these bacteria to translocate specific effectors directly into the host cell cytoplasm in order to exert a broad range of virulence functions . 
The T3SS assemble needle-like appendages that share similarity with the flagellar basal body . 
Some of its proteins , including those that form the core of the central channel , are highly conserved between the two systems [ 13 ] . 
The T3SS apparatus , also referred to as the injectisome , spans the inner and outer membranes of the bacterial envelope and secretes translocon and effector proteins . 
Translocon proteins allow access of effector proteins to the eukaryotic cells by forming pores in the host cell membrane and forming a connecting channellike complex between the bacterium and the eukaryotic membrane . 
The effector proteins further subvert different aspects of host cell physiology and immunity , thereby promoting bacterial virulence [ 14 ] . 
S. enterica encodes two distinct virulence-associated T3SS with roles in different phases of pathogenesis . 
Salmonella pathogenicity islands The genes for virulence factors of most bacterial pathogens cluster in pathogenicity islands , owing to integration of foreign genome fragments into the bacterial chromosome . 
Pathogenicity islands are large chromosomal regions that are present in pathogenic bacteria and confer virulence properties . 
Pathogenicity islands can be characterized by their large size , lower GC content , association with ` mobile DNA elements ' such as integrases , insertion sequence elements , bacteriophage genomes , genetic instability and presence of one or more virulence genes [ 15 ] . 
Important virulence characters of S. enterica are encoded by genes within Salmonella pathogenicity islands ( SPI ) , such as the interaction with enterocytes resulting in diarrhea , the invasion of nonphagocytic cells , and the ability to survive phagocytosis and to proliferate within eukaryotic host cells . 
A remarkable feature of S. enterica is the presence of a large number of SPI . 
Two major SPI , SPI1 and SPI2 , encode T3SS that translocate bacterial effectors [ 16 ] . 
The contribution of SPI1 and SPI2 to Salmonella pathogenesis is depicted in ( Figure 1 ) . 
The SPI1-T3SS delivers at least 13 effector proteins across the host cell plasma membrane . 
The functions of effectors in early infection include the control of cytoskeleton rearrangement , triggering cell entry , inflammation , loss of electrolytes and apoptosis [ 17 ] . 
Salmonella mutant strains lacking a functional SPI1-T3SS are unable to invade epithelial cells or to induce proinflammatory cytokines in in vitro models [ 18 ] . 
These mutants are not only attenuated for virulence in the mouse typhoid fever model when inoculated orally , but also when inoculated intravenously , and they fail to produce significant secretory or inflammatory responses [ 19 ] . 
These features of SPI1 mutant strains are of interest for generation of Salmonella-based live vaccines . 
The function of SPI2 is essential for the second hallmark of Salmonella pathogenesis , the ability to cause systemic infections and to proliferate within host organs . 
This virulence phenotype is linked to the ability of Salmonella to survive in phagocytic cells and to replicate within the 
Salmonella-containing vesicle ( SCV ) in a variety of eukaryotic cells . 
More than 20 SPI2 effectors are known to be translocated over the SCV membrane into the host cell cytoplasm [ 16 ] . 
The SPI2-T3SS is a multifunctional virulence system : phenotypes linked to its function include avoidance of the oxidative burst , cytotoxicity , intracellular actin assembly , alteration of inducible nitric oxide synthase localization in infected macrophages , cholesterol accumulation near the SCV and , most prominently , the redirection of vesicular traffic in infected cells and the maintenance of the SCV [ 17 ] . 
In addition , SPI2 mutant strains were unable to proliferate within host organs and showed reduced survival and proliferation inside host cells [ 20,21 ] . 
This attenuation has put focus on SPI2-deficient strains as live attenuated vaccines and live carrier strains [ 22 ] . 
However , SPI2 mutants show wild-type phenotypes in the interaction with the intestinal epithelium and cause diarrhea in different animal models [ 23 ] . 
Salmonella as a carrier for delivering heterologous antigens Live attenuated strains of Salmonella that synthesize and secrete foreign antigens are being developed as vaccines for a number of infectious diseases by bacterial , viral and parasitic patho-gens and against cancer . 
Moreover , the use of live attenuated Salmonellae to deliver recombinant antigens to the immune system is an attractive strategy for the construction of multivalent vaccines . 
Salmonella-based vaccines provide a number of advantages over other antigen delivery strategies , including low cost of production , oral delivery , the absence of animal products , genetic stability and safety . 
In addition , Salmonella vaccines delivering heterologous antigens stimulate innate immunity and also activate both arms of the adaptive immune system by which they exert an efficient immune response . 
The existence of the serovar Typhimurium mouse model for preclinical work and favorable prior human experience with the live attenuated vaccine S. typhi Ty21a , are important benefits for the development of Salmonella vaccine carriers . 
Ty21a is a US FDA-approved vaccine for typhoid fever and serves as an important safety benchmark for researchers undertaking clinical trials [ 24 ] . 
As a consequence of the intracellular location of Salmonella , secreted proteins are trapped in the phagolysosome and presented to the immune system preferentially in the context of MHC class II molecules . 
There have been several approaches proposed in the literature for bioengineering Salmonella strains , which could deliver antigens directly to the intracellular compartment instead of the phagosome . 
In the following paragraphs two main strategies used by researchers for using Salmonella to deliver foreign antigens are discussed . 
The major strategies of Salmonella-based vaccines are shown in Figure 2 . 
Salmonella-mediated DNA transfer strategies The direct injection of naked DNA for vaccination has several advantages , but also suffers from severe problems . 
Due to low numbers of APCs in muscle tissues [ 25 ] , the efficiency of the DNA uptake seems to be quite low and dose dependent . 
Thus , elicitation of protective immune responses requires injection of high amounts of DNA into muscle tissue . 
Further , injection of plasmid DNA does not seem to induce efficient immune responses at distant mucosal surfaces [ 26 ] . 
Classically , DNA vectors are classified into nonviral and viral vectors , but gene transfer can also occur from bacteria to a very broad range of recipients that include yeast , plants and mammalian cells [ 24 ] . 
The use of intracellular bacteria that have access to the host cell cytosol may allow more specific targeting of DNA vaccine vectors to professional APCs . 
Due to its invasive properties and preference for macrophages and dendritic cells ( DCs ) , Salmonella are ideally suited for a more direct targeting of DNA vaccines to professional APCs [ 1,27 ] . 
Recombinant Salmonella should be metabolically attenuated in order to die and lyse in these cells ; consequently , the plasmid mol-ecules are liberated to transfect host cells [ 28 ] . 
At the same time , the invaded cells are activated by bacterial endotoxins and other bacterial components that stimulate innate immune responses . 
This might lead to the direct presentation of antigen to T cells . 
In addition , indirect or cross presentation of apoptotic molecules derived from the apoptosis-like reaction in activated macrophages is also induced by Salmonella [ 29 ] . 
Neighboring DCs efficiently clear these apoptotic bodies , and re-present these antigens to T cells [ 30 ] . 
DC migration from Peyer 's patches to lymph nodes or spleen , or plasmid-bearing bacteria that disseminate via phagocytes , could be responsible for induction of systemic immune responses [ 31 ] . 
The plasmid DNA is released into the phagosome or subsequently enters the nucleus and plasmid-encoded antigens can be expressed . 
The mechanism by which plasmid DNA escapes into the cytosol and is delivered to the nucleus remains unclear [ 24,31 ] . 
Finally , these antigens can be presented by APCs in the context of MHC I and MHC II molecules to CD8 + and CD4 + T cells , thereby eliciting cellular immune responses and promoting humoral immune responses . 
The strategy of using live attenuated Salmonella to deliver plasmid-encoded antigens under the transcriptional control of eukaryotic promoters has been used successfully in vaccination [ 32 ] . 
Salmonella carrier DNA vaccines have been employed in prophylactic immunization against bacteria , viruses , fungi , parasites and even against cancer [ 24,31 ] . 
Many studies have exploited S. typhimurium as a gene delivery vector against bacterial infections , inducing protective humoral and cellular immune responses . 
When b-galactosidase was used as a transgene , specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes ( CTLs ) and T-helper cells ( Th ) , as well as specific antibodies could be detected after a single oral vaccination [ 33 ] . 
Protection of mice against a lethal challenge with L. monocytogenes was observed when two virulence factors of Listeria monocytogenes ( LLO and ActA ) were encoded by S. typhimurium vectors [ 34 ] . 
Oral multiantigen DNA vaccines delivered in attenuated S. typhimurium enhance protection against nasopharyngeal Streptococcus pneumoniae [ 35 ] . 
Viral infections have also been targeted through DNA vaccination mediated by Salmonella . 
Oral vaccination with S. typhimurium encoding a hepatitis B virus surface antigen proved successful at inducing CTLs in BALB/c mice [ 36,37 ] . 
Recombinant S. typhimurium administered orally was also reported to induce an immune response against HSV 2 [ 38 ] , human papillomavirus 16 [ 39 ] and lethal enterovirus 71 [ 40 ] . 
Vaccination against HIV was attempted using attenuated strains of Salmonella carrying eukaryotic expression plasmid encoding HIV gp12 [ 41 ] . 
S. typhimurium expressing HPV16L1 as a model antigen of HPV infections can induce both innate and adaptive mucosal immune responses [ 42 ] . 
Surprisingly , oral Salmonella carrier DNA vaccines induced immune responses against the secreted cell wall antigen Mp1p of the pathogenic Pencillium marneffei [ 43 ] . 
Salmonella was used for oral DNA vaccination against the LACK protein of Leishmania major parasites [ 31 ] . 
The aroA mutant strain of S. typhimurium was exploited as a DNA delivery system for cruzipain , and conferred protective immunity against Trypanosoma cruzi [ 44 ] . 
Salmonella strains have been used to deliver DNA for therapeutic applications in oncology . 
Oral administration of strains of Salmonella harboring eukaryotic expression vectors for model tumor antigens , such as b-galactosidase or hgp100 , protected mice against challenges with fibrosarcoma [ 45 ] , renal carcinoma [ 46 ] , and mel-anoma [ 47 ] cells expressing the relevant model antigen . 
Transgenes , including the mgp100 , fused to the invariant chain epitopes of mgp100 ; TRP2 fused to ubiquitin , and a minigene encoding epitopes of the tyrosine hydroxylase fused to ubiquitin were used . 
The complete tyrosine hydroxylase coding sequence was linked to a virus-derived post-transcriptional regulatory element , and human carcinoembryonic antigen in an human carcinoembryonic antigen mouse transgenic model , which showed successful protection . 
However , the low rate of somatic gene transfer to the host cells inherent to DNA vaccines limits their potential use for vaccination and calls for the development of new strategies to increase the efficacy of Salmonella carrier vaccines [ 24 ] . 
Salmonella T3SS-mediated heterologous antigen delivery The CD4 + T cells are specific for peptides presented by MHC class II molecules that display antigens derived from the phagosomal compartment on the cell surface . 
A CD4 + T cell population ( Th cells ) produce various cytokines that have a major influence in ensuring the immune response . 
The so-called Th2 cells activate eosin-ophils and basophils and are critical for B cell maturation into antibody producing plasma cells . 
Accordingly , Th2 cells are responsible for control of helminthic infections , bacterial infection and for toxin neutralization . 
The so-called Th1 cells produce cytokines , such as IFN-g and IL-2 , which activate CTLs and macrophages . 
By contrast , CD8 + T cells recognize antigenic peptides presented by MHC I molecules that transport antigens from the cytoplasm to the cell surface . 
Accordingly , CD8 + T cells are responsible for the response against viral pathogens and also for those intracellular bacteria which egress into the cytoplasm . 
L. monocytogenes also stimulates CD4 + T cells , and most microbes remaining in the phagosome can stimulate CD8 + T cells [ 1 ] . 
Localization within the SCV prevents delivery of expressed foreign proteins to the MHC class I-restricted antigen presentation pathway and hinders the use of Salmonella as a vaccine carrier to induce specific CD8 + T cells , which is crucial for protection against viruses , intracellular bacteria and tumors . 
Heterologous antigens can be expressed in Salmonella as fusions with recombinant or native proteins . 
This approach was mainly used to direct the expression of the desired antigen to a particular location of the bacterial cell and increase the immunogenicity of foreign antigens by fusing them to proteins that could exert a carrier effect . 
Towards this end , Salmonella T3SS-mediated translocation can be used for efficient delivery of heterologous antigens to the cytosol of antigen-pre-senting cells leading to prominent CD8 + T cell responses [ 48 -- 50 ] . 
Salmonella translocates T3SS effector proteins into the host cell cytoplasm , mediated by either the SPI1-T3SS from the extracellular stage and from the SCV at an early stage after entry or the SPI2-T3SS from the SCV at later stages during intracellular life [ 9,15,17 ] . 
The immune response to an antigen depends on abundance of the antigen , the access of the antigen to the respective processing compartment , and the efficacy of antigen processing . 
These factors affect the relative degree of induction of T cell induction , which in turn depends on the fate of the respective antigen . 
Salmonella T3SS-mediated translocation can be used for efficient delivery of heterologous antigen fusions to SPI1 or SPI2 effector proteins to the cytosol of APC , leading to prominent CD8 + T cell priming in orally immunized mice [ 51 ] . 
Cytosolic versus phagosomal antigen delivery Heterologous antigens expressed by recombinant Salmonella carrier strains can be delivered to distinct subcellular locations of the host cells . 
A critical parameter is the selection of appropriate carrier proteins . 
SPI1 effector protein SopE2 is a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for host cellular Rho GTPases [ 52 ] and plays a role in the early invasion steps of Salmonella into host cells [ 53 ] . 
The C-terminal 355 amino acids of P60 ( P60 ) from L. monocytogenes 130 -- 484 served as a model antigenic protein fragment fused to N-terminal portions of SopE2 protein . 
SopE2/P60 expressed under the control of its native promoter was detected in the cytosolic fraction of macrophages at 2 and 6 h but not 24 h after infection . 
Vaccination of mice with Salmonella strains expressing SopE2/P60 led to the induction of P60-specific CD8 + T cells [ 54 ] . 
SPI2 effector proteins , especially those which are expressed only when the Salmonella is inside the host cell DCs and macrophages [ 55,56 ] , have been thought as promising carrier candidates for antigen delivery to MHC I pathway . 
SPI2 effector SifA is required for the formation of lysosomal glycoprotein-containing structures , called SIFs , and to maintain the integrity of the phagosomal membrane of the SCV during intracellular proliferation [ 17 ] . 
Vaccination of mice with Salmonella strains expressing SifA/P60 led to the induction of P60-specific CD8 + T cells [ 54 ] . 
Previously , our group focused on testing and comparing several SPI2-antigen fusions and used different model antigens that include P60 , ovalbumin , LLO and the tumor-associated antigen survivin . 
S. typhimurium-attenuated strains expressing chimeric proteins engaged by SseF , another SPI2 effector , under control of an intracellular activated promoters efficiently induced both CD4 + and CD8 + T cells [ 57 -- 59 ] . 
Investigations in our group compared various intracellular activated promoters of the SPI2 genes and genes of SPI2-T3SS effector proteins and resulted in identifying promoters most suitable for construction of vectors for live attenuated Salmonella carrier strains [ 60 ] . 
While SseF , SifA , SseJ and other SPI2-effectors are localized inside host cell on the membrane of SCV and SIFs , SpiC and SspH2 are trans-located to the cell cytoplasm [ 17 ] . 
Focusing on these cytosolic translocated SPI2 effectors might be beneficial in inducing an efficient immune response . 
Interestingly , YopE for heterologous antigen delivery by the Salmonella T3SS was analyzed . 
YopE was fused to the immunodominant T cell antigens LLO and P60 . 
Salmonella secreted and translocated these chimeric proteins into the cytosolic compartments of host cells but not into endosomal compartments . 
This led to efficient MHC I-restricted antigen presentation of listerial nonamer peptides . 
Mice orally vaccinated with attenuated S. typhimurium expressing translocated hybrid YopE proteins revealed an efficient and specific CD8 + T cell response , protecting mice against a challenge with L. monocytogenes . 
These findings suggest that YopE is a versatile carrier molecule for T3SS-mediated foreign antigen delivery by Salmonella vaccine strains [ 61,62 ] . 
SspH2 co-localizes with the polymerizing actin cytoskeleton in the host cell and interacts with filamin and profiling , and localizes in the cytoplasm of the host cell [ 17 ] . 
SspH2/P60 hybrid proteins led to concomitant P60-specific CD4 + and CD8 + T cell priming , indicating that the SPI2 effector protein SspH2 might be an attractive carrier molecule for antigen delivery when T cell immune responses against complex microbes or tumors are needed [ 54,63 ] . 
Considerations for development of Salmonella as a live carrier
Attenuated mutant strains as a carrier A mandatory requirement for the use of live recombinant Salmonella for vaccination is a sufficient attenuation in virulence to prevent undesired side effects , such as bacteremia , diarrhea or fever . 
However , a critical balance between attenuation and over-attenuation must be considered as over-attenuation can lead to poor immunogenicity of the vaccine . 
In vivo studies indicate that various independent genetic defects can yield adequately attenuated Salmonella strains . 
The choice of the attenuating mutations should keep the balance between attenuation and virulence , carry at least two independent attenuating mutations to minimize the hypothetical risk of reversion to virulence and be genetically stable . 
For specific applications , it might be necessary to establish systems to minimize the possibility of horizontal gene transfer from the vaccine strain to members of the mucosal flora or environmental microorganisms . 
Mutants deficient in the biosynthesis of aromatic amino acids or purines , adenylate cyclase or cAMP receptor protein , carrying mutations affecting the global regulatory system phoPQ , or lacking the DNA adenine methylase , Dam , have been most widely characterized as carriers in experimental studies [ 64,65 ] . 
So far , none of these attenuated strains of Salmonella have been approved as carrier strains for recombinant vaccines for applications in human and in veterinary medicine . 
S. typhimurium-based carrier stains Infection of Salmonella-susceptible mouse strains with S. typhimurium results in systemic infections that provide a model for typhoid fever in humans . 
This animal model is routinely used to determine the level of attenuation of carrier strains . 
The aroA mutant strains were proven to be safe and widely used as carrier for vaccination . 
SL5000 and SL7207 aroA mutant carrier strains were widely used to deliver DNA for heterologous antigens and induce humoral and cellular responses [ 64 ] . 
The SL7207 strain was used to deliver antigens cruzipain , gD and gB from HSVgp100 and TRP-2 epitopes of melanoma , tyrosine hydroxylase and ureB for protection against Trypanosoma cruzi , HSV-2 virus , mela-noma , neuroplastoma and Helicobacter pylori , respectively [ 64 ] . 
aroA double mutant strains were also examined ; for example , the aroA and dam double mutant ( Re88 ) was successfully used to deliver the gene for tumor antigen Survivin and to induce protection against lung cancer [ 66 ] . 
In human clinical trials , strain WT05 with double mutation aroC ssaV was also found to be safe , but only induced humoral responses of variable strength [ 67 ] . 
Double mutant strains of S. typhimurium defective in pur in combination with other genes were found to induce both humoral and cellular immune responses . 
The use of the htrA purD mutant strain to deliver tumor-associated antigen Survivin induced protective CD4 + and CD8 + responses [ 59 ] . 
Clinical trials using LH1160 ( purB phoP phoQ ) and Vnp20009 ( purI xyl msbB ) mutant strains induced humoral responses by oral and intravenous routes , respectively [ 68,69 ] . 
Other experimental studies were done to utilize different mutations to increase the immunogenicity of heterologous antigens and at the same time achieve required attenuation . 
As a vaccine carrier , the rfaH mutant strain of S. typhimurium enhanced the immunogenicity of heterologous antigens and was sufficiently attenuated in mice [ 70 ] . 
Mutations in Salmonella virulence genes were tested to develop efficient carriers . 
Despite reduced inflammatory responses and fluid secretion into the intestinal lumen , inactivation of SopB , a SPI1-T3SS translocated effector protein , also showed similar tissue distribution and promoted a similar immune response to a wild-type strain [ 71 ] . 
As SopB is known to aid the bacterial immune escape mechanisms , it can be subverted to optimize carrier performance . 
Moreover , sopB derivatives are less toxic for DCs , which are more efficient in their capacity to process and present antigens expressed by the carrier [ 71,72 ] . 
In vitro studies in our laboratory showed that sifA mutants stimulated specific CD8 + T cell proliferation more than aroA mutants when used to deliver the Ova model antigen to B3Z T cells that have the lacZ reporter [ Hegazy WAH , Hensel M. Unpublished Observations ] . 
Recently , new systems were developed in S. typhimurium to enhance the safety and immunogenicity , including regulated delay of in vivo attenuation [ 73 ] , antigen synthesis [ 74 ] and cell lysis [ 75 ] . 
S. typhi-based carrier strains
Translating the approaches of S. typhimuriumbased vaccines for mice into a S. typhi-based vaccine for humans has led to mixed results . 
For example , DgalE , DaroC DaroD , Dcya Dcrp or DphoPQ mutants of S. typhimurium were completely attenuated in mice and induced protective immunity to challenge with wild-type S. typhimurium . 
By contrast , S. typhi DgalE , DaroC DaroD and Dcya Dcrp mutants were not sufficiently attenuated and caused significant reactogenicity in humans [ 76 ] . 
Taking into consideration the distinct human pathogenicity of S. typhi compared with S. typhimurium , new strategies to sufficiently attenuate S. typhi and overcome the reactogenicity will be essential . 
In this direction S. typhi triple mutant strains deleted in cya crp cdt [ 77,78 ] or aroC aroD htrA [ 79 ] were reported to be safe and immunogenic in humans . 
It was not surprising to find that mutations that highly attenuate S. typhimurium were safe and immunogenic when transferred to S. typhi . 
Furthermore , the DaroC DssaV S. typhi Ty2 mutant was reported to be safe and immu-nogenic in humans , while the corresponding 
S. typhimurium mutant strain was strongly attenuated and showed variable humoral response [ 67 ] . 
Another example is the phoP mutant of S. typhimurium , which is completely attenuated in mice , and led to development of a safe and immunogenic DphoPQ S. typhi ( Ty800 ) vaccine strain [ 80,81 ] . 
Nonreactogenic S. typhi strains are often hyperattenuated and induce poor immune responses , even to Salmonella antigens themselves [ 81 ] . 
The use of live S. typhi vectors in humans still faces major difficulty in balancing between immunogenicity to vectored antigen and reactogenicity . 
It is believed that the recombinant S. typhi strains do not colonize lymphoid tissues to a sufficient level to stimulate a strong immune response against the foreign antigens . 
The host immune system may also be stimulated by the Salmonella carrier , inducing a strong response against Salmonella antigens instead of the vectored antigen [ 82 ] . 
This anti-vector response can cause severe limitations to prime boost vaccination regimes . 
Adjuvants for Salmonella live vaccines Adjuvants are molecules , compounds or mac-romolecular complexes that boost the potency and longevity of a specific immune response to antigens , causing long-lasting immune effects . 
Adjuvants functions to enhance , prolong and direct the immunogenicity of antigens that result in reducing the amount of antigen or number of immunizations required and improving the efficacy of vaccines [ 83 ] . 
Adjuvants are important in modern vaccination as they pres-ent vaccine antigen to the immune system in an optimal manner and control the release of antigen [ 83 ] . 
Recently , immunostimulants that directly act on the immune system , such as Tolllike receptor ligands , cytokines , saponins and bacterial exotoxins , were introduced as potent adjuvants . 
Alum , an aluminum salt-based adjuvant , is widely used in several licensed human vaccines [ 84 ] . 
Cholera toxin B subunit is used to enhance mucosal responses of orally delivered vaccines [ 85 ] . 
To further increase immunogenicity of the Salmonella DNA vaccine , the use of molecular adjuvants , such as chemokine and cytokines have been employed [ 86 ] . 
Molecular adjuvants are administered typically as plasmids encoding chemokines , cytokines , or costimulatory mol-ecules . 
They are administered in conjunction with a given DNA vaccine and serve as immune modulators . 
Proinflammatory cytokines , such as GM-CSF , IL-1a , TNF-a ; Th1 cytokines , such as IFN-g , IL-2 and IL-18 ; Th2 cytokines , such as IL-4 , IL-6 and IL-10 ; and chemokines , such as CCL5 or CCL21 have been used in various approaches that indicate the applicability of these adjuvants ( reviewed in [ 87 ] ) . 
There is also a number of approaches to utilize attenuated live Salmonella strains for the expression of recombinant cytokines . 
Early studies used Salmonella expressing IL-6 [ 88 ] or TNFa , MIF or IFN-g [ 89 ] . 
The latter study reported that the combination of Salmonella-expressed cytokines results in increased defense against experimental infections of mice with L. major . 
Al-Ramadi and colleagues reported that administration of Il-2-expressing Salmonella stimulated cytotoxic activity of NK cells and production of reactive nitrogen species , resulting in increased protection against a Salmonella challenge infection [ 90 ] . 
IL-2 expressing Salmonella were used in various subsequent studies ( see [ 86,91 ] for examples ) demonstrating the applicability of this strategy . 
Various approaches were directed to engineer Salmonella strains for improved antitumor activity . 
The expression of the recombinant cytokines LIGHT [ 92 ] , IL-18 [ 93 ] or chemokine CCL21 [ 94 ] , by tumor-targeting Salmonella were reported to improve the antitumor activity in experimental studies . 
For therapeutic vaccination against tumors , specific adjuvants have been experimentally evaluated . 
a-galactosylceramide , a glycolipid with an a-anomeric-linked galactose moiety , was originally derived from the marine sponge Agelas mauritianus and was shown to possess potent antitumor properties in mice , which required the presence of both CD1d , as the antigen-pre-senting molecule , and NKT cells [ 95 ] . 
NKTs are activated during Salmonella infection by IL-12 and IL-18 produced by LPS-activated DCs [ 96 ] and , possibly , by an endogenous ligand isoglo-botrihexosylceramide [ 97 ] . 
NKTs play a crucial role in immunity against viral infection , cancer and intracellular bacterial infection . 
NKT ligands galactosylceramides trigger CD1d - and Toll-like receptor-mediated programs in DCs and induce effector responses by NKT and T cells . 
These molecules were used with great success as adjuvants for Salmonella-based cancer vaccines [ 59 ] . 
Expression of heterologous antigens & vector stability
Several factors , such as the cellular location of the foreign antigen expressed by Salmonella carrier strains , may affect the magnitude and type of immune response induced against an antigen . 
This influence may be due to degradation of the antigen in certain cellular compartments or modification of the antigen presentation to the immune system . 
While efficient antigen display is an indispensable requirement for induction of T cells , the strength of antigen presentation might depend on antigen abundance . 
Thus it is hypothesized that the higher the antigen expression , the higher the immunogenicity of antigens . 
Surprisingly , the highest levels of expression are not necessarily required for an elevated immune response to heterologous antigens [ 60,98 ] . 
As with any foreign antigen expression system in bacteria , certain proteins may be toxic to carrier bacteria , especially when they are expressed at high levels . 
The foreign genes inserted into the chromosome or foreign plasmid vectors carried by Salmonella-based vaccines should possess some containment features to minimize the possibility of transfer to , and maintenance in , other bacterial species . 
There are also other points that should be considered for successful construction of a heterologous antigen expression cassette . 
For example , the stability of plasmid , enzymatic degradation , resistance to any antibiotic and incorrect folding of the expressed antigen ( s ) are some of the most common problems encountered in the development of Salmonella-based recombinant strains . 
In the following section , we will discuss some ideas to overcome these limitations . 
Low-level or unstable expression of heterologous antigens Although the highest expression level may not induce the highest immune response [ 60 ] , there is a necessity to express foreign antigen at sufficient levels to induce immune an response . 
Plasmids with different replicons and greatly differing copy number have been used for antigen expression in Salmonella . 
Although , high expression level of high-copy number plasmids can improve the immunogenicity of the vaccine [ 99 ] , unfortunately high-level expression of the heterologous antigen has been found to be toxic to the Salmonella carrier . 
Lowering the copy number of the plasmid often results in increased stability of the construct and in reduction of the expression of the heterologous antigen to nontoxic levels [ 57,100 ] . 
A possible solution is to construct expression cassettes in which promoters are located on inverting sequences , ensuring that expression of heterologous antigen only occurs when the promoters are in frame with the antigen-encoding sequences [ 101,102 ] . 
An alternative technique involves the use of in vivo-inducible promoters that allow expression of heterologous antigens at a particular cellular location . 
Using these promoters , the level of antigen expression will be low until the Salmonella carrier recognizes an environmental stimulus , which then results in increased antigen expression . 
Ideally , the promoters should allow increased expression in APCs following uptake of the Salmonella carriers . 
For example , the nirB in vivo-inducible promoter is known to be induced by entry of Salmonella into cells in anaerobic environments [ 103 ] . 
The expression of genes within SPI2 , as well as large number of loci outside of SPI2 , is under control of the SPI2-encoded two regulatory system SsrAB [ 104 ] . 
Promoters of the SsrAB virulon appear to be ideal in vivo-induced promoters , as they can be used for the temporally and spatially controlled expression of heterologous antigens by live attenuated bacterial carrier strains . 
P of sseA the SsrAB virulon , that is active after the uptake of Salmonella by antigen-presenting cells [ 105 ] , was used to generate recombinant vaccines using attenuated S. typhimurium bacteria as carriers [ 57,100 ] . 
Upon testing other SsrAB-regulated promoters for in vivo activity , P and P were sifB sseJ found to be activated efficiently for generation of Salmonella-based vaccines [ 60,106 ] . 
In addition to the low expression level of heter-ologous antigens in Salmonella , unstable expression of the antigens may also be encountered , particularly in vivo . 
Such problems may occur as a result of instability of the genes encoding the antigens . 
The attempts to increase plasmid stability and to reduce the toxic effects of the expressed proteins on the bacterial carrier are not always successful and , in some cases , integration of the foreign genes in the chromosome may be needed . 
Chromosomal integration of foreign genes
To solve the problem of instability , a system was developed by which DNA encoding a heterologous antigen could be incorporated by recombination into the Salmonella chromosome . 
The foreign gene is introduced into the Salmonella vaccine on a suicide-vector ( unable to replicate in the bacterial host ) with flanking regions that allow incorporation into the Salmonella chromosome by homologous recombination into a predetermined site [ 107 ] . 
This is an attractive solution that has several advantages , such as elimination of the unstable plasmid and removal of the antibiotic resistance marker [ 107 ] . 
In addition , the insertion of expression cassettes for heterologous antigen into the chromosome can introduce an attenuating mutation that may be useful for construction of vaccine strains [ 108 ] . 
Chromosomal integration of a heterologous gene can result in complete stabilization of expression . 
However , the antigen will be expressed from only a single copy of the foreign gene , compared with multiple copies of the gene present in Salmonella harboring a multicopy expression plasmid . 
This may result in low expression of the antigen and , as a result , low immunogenicity . 
Possible ways to avoid this problem may involve the integration of several copies of the foreign gene into the chromosome or the use of stronger promoters . 
Use of selectable markers
The development of recombinant Salmonella vaccines usually requires the use of selectable markers , often conferring antibiotic resistance . 
However , there is the concern that resistance genes may spread to pathogenic organisms in the environment , possibly rendering them resistant to antibiotic treatment . 
The use of plasmids carrying antibiotic-resistance genes for human use is not ideal and it is needed to develop Salmonella vaccine systems that do not contain antibiotic-resistance markers . 
Initial attempts used the insertion of plasmid vectors into the chromosome ( see [ 109 ] for examples ) , but this strategy usually conferred antibiotic resistance to the resulting strain . 
Alternative strategies have been developed allowing the stable insertion of markerless expression cassettes for heterologous antigens into the chromosome ( for review , see [ 50 ] ) . 
Balanced lethal stabilization systems An alternative approach to genetic stability is the use of balanced lethal plasmid stabilization systems . 
This involves the incorporation of the gene encoding the heterologous antigen into a series of plasmids containinga a gene that complements a metabolic defect in the Salmonella carrier strain . 
As an example , plasmid vectors carrying the gene of the aspartate b-semialdehyde dehydrogenase ( asd ) were generated . 
The enzyme is required in the biosynthetic pathways for several amino acids , as well as for diaminopimelic acid , an essential constituent of the peptidoglycan of the cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria . 
Diaminopimelic acid can not be supplied by the host , and thus asd defects result in lysis of bacteria . 
Salmonella asd mutant strains were complemented with the asd + plasmid , constituting a balanced lethal combination in that all surviving cells would have to possess the recombinant asd + plasmid [ 110,111 ] . 
Expression plasmids carrying the thymidylate synthetase ( thyA ) gene provide another balanced lethal system , used to complement a Salmonella vaccine strain with a thymidine requirement , caused by a mutation in the chromosomal thyA gene [ 112 ] . 
Further antibiotic resistance markerfree systems for plasmid stabilization include the complementation of a chromosomal purB deletion by the plasmid-borne purB gene [ 68 ] and the operator-repressor titration technology [ 113 ] . 
The latter approach is also based on the episomal complementation of an auxotrophy . 
This makes use of artificial inducer that is present during cultivation of the vaccine strains in vitro , but is absent in the vaccinated host . 
Incompatible plasmids carrying promoter & repressor Incompatible plasmid systems were used to control the expression of recombinant proteins that are toxic to Salmonella [ 114 ] . 
A foreign antigen is expressed from one plasmid under the control of the trc promoter , and a second incompatible plasmid carries the LacI repressor . 
As a result , expression of the foreign antigen will be repressed when the bacteria are grown in vitro under antibiotic selection for both plasmids . 
The plasmid that carries the foreign antigen also encodes Asd and will be essential for survival of an asd Salmonella mutant . 
During growth of Salmonella within the host , the incompatible plasmid encoding the LacI repressor is rapidly lost . 
This segregation results in de-repression of the heterologous antigen gene under control of the trc promoter and constitutive expression in vivo [ 114 ] . 
The ‘on–off’ expression system
An ` on -- off ' promoter controlled by a randomly invertible sequence derived from the bacteriophage Mu Gin invertase generates a nonexpressing bacterial population that continually yields producing bacteria . 
When the system was used for expression of the B-subunit of cholera toxin in an aroA Salmonella vaccine , an increase in specific systemic and secretory antibody responses was obtained [ 101 ] . 
Salmonella for vaccination against cancer Surgery , radiotherapy and chemotherapy are conventional anticancer therapies that are effective in the treatment of solid tumors . 
These therapies not only have limited clinical efficacy , but also severe side effects . 
Use of bacteria as an alternative cancer therapeutic has sporadically been followed for more than a century . 
At the beginning of the 19th century , Vautier observed a correlation between bacterial infections of cancer patients and the regression of their tumors [ 115 ] . 
To this end , different bacteria showed an efficient targeting and colonization in solid tumors . 
Such bacteria are either obligate anaerobic bacteria , such as Clostridium or Bifidobacterium , or facultative anaerobes like Escherichia coli or Salmonella . 
Importantly , S. typhimurium was shown not only to colonize large , established tumors , but also to exhibit the property to invade and affect metastases [ 116 ] . 
Moreover , Salmonella preferably colonized solid tumors . 
Salmonella is found in ratios from 250:1 to 9000:1 in tumors cell : liver cells and this enrichment usually results in tumor growth retardation [ 117 ] . 
Tumor cells produce compounds that specifically chemoattract bacteria to the necrotic areas of a tumor [ 118 ] . 
There are several receptors that might attract S. typhimurium to peculiar regions of tumors by controlling their chemotaxis towards specific tumor microenvironments [ 119 ] . 
In contrast to obligate anaerobic bacteria , Salmonella colonize large solid tumors that contain huge hypoxic cores and accumulate within metastases after systemic administration [ 120 -- 122 ] . 
This renders Salmonella an ideal candidate for bacteriamediated tumor therapy . 
A recent study indicated that Salmonella infection stimulates the expression of gap junctions in melanoma that are normally absent in tumor cells [ 123 ] . 
These gap junctions are important for the transfer of tumor antigens to dendritic cells and subsequent stimulation of immune responses . 
Most experimental studies have been performed with S. typhimurium strains in tumorbearing mice , but a number of studies also investigated attenuated S. typhi strains in murine models for tumor targeting [ 124 ] or delivery of siRNA to tumors [ 125 ] . 
Salmonella have been used experimentally in combination with chemotherapeutics , such as cisplatin , endostatin or cyclophospha-mide against cancer [ 126,127 ] . 
Also combining Salmonella injections and x-ray treatment or low-dose radiation was explored [ 128 ] . 
Such studies showed an enhanced antitumor effect when combining chemotherapy or radiotherapy with the application of Salmonella in comparison to either treatment alone . 
There are several successful trials using Salmonella as DNA vaccine carriers [ 129 ] or Salmonella SPI2-T3SS antigen delivery [ 49,59 ] to induce specific cellular immunity . 
For designing Salmonella as a carrier for vaccination , it is more important to select a mutant carrier , a tumor antigen and the route of administration to ensure an efficient immune response . 
In contrast to other tumor-targeting bacteria , Salmonella accumulate in solid tumors not only after systemic infection but also after oral administration [ 126 ] . 
Salmonella mutant carriers should keep this balance between virulence , to induce efficient immune response , and attenuation , to avoid harm to the host ( see above ) . 
The Salmonella htrA purD mutant carrier was employed to deliver Survivin antigen and showed an efficient and specific immune response in a murine model of brain tumor glio-blastoma [ 59 ] . 
The attenuated S. typhimurium strain VNP20009 as tested in two trials on a total of 28 patients with malignant melanoma and one patient with metastatic renal cell carcinoma in a phase I study . 
From three patients who exhibited focal bacterial colonization of the tumor , only one responded to the treatment completely and was tumor free 3 months after infection . 
A second patient showed strong tumor growth after an initial retardation [ 69,130 ] may be due to over-attenuation of the strain leading to impeded entry into the tumor [ 116 ] . 
The cancer immunotherapies designed for direct attacks on tumor cells face longstanding limitations with poor immunogenicity of tumor self-antigens and the genetic instability of tumor cells . 
Thus , the selection of proper tumor antigen is critical for efficacy of Salmonella-based vaccines against cancer . 
Ideal targets for vaccination are tumor-associated antigens . 
Tumor-associated antigens for therapeutic vaccination should possess properties , such as overexpression in tumor but little or no expression in normal tissue , ability to generate endogenous peptides that can be presented on different HLAs and expression in many cancers so that one vaccine could treat many types of cancer . 
At 16.5 kDa , Survivin is the smallest member of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein family . 
Survivin is considered an excellent tumor-asso-ciated antigen , as the vast majority of tumors express Survivin protein at high levels , while most normal adult tissue do not . 
Besides tumor cells , Survivin is also overexpressed in tumor vascular endothelial cells and is required for both tumor cell survival and tumor-induced angiogenesis . 
Survivin is immunogenic and naturally occurring Survivin-specific CD8 + T cells have been detected at high frequencies in patients with cancer but were not detected in healthy people . 
CTL reactivity against a number of Survivin epitopes has been identified in patients with breast , colon , gastric and esophageal cancer and melanoma [ 131 -- 133 ] . 
Salmonella mutant carrier has been used to target Survivin antigens for the HLA class I pathway . 
The evaluation of antitumor efficacy of Survivin DNA vaccine against pancreatic carcinoma in mouse models resulted in antitumor effects and increased tumor infiltrative lymphocytes [ 134 ] . 
Recently , a T3SS-translocated SPI2 effector -- Survivin fusion protein was explored to induce specific CTLs [ 59 ] . 
Further , the efficacy of the Survivin Salmonella-based vaccine was enhanced by optimizing codon usage . 
A Salmonella carrier strain expressing Survivin with a codon usage adjusted to that found in Salmonella showed enhanced tumor-specific killing of targets [ 135 ] . 
Several attempts were devised to enhance the antitumor effect of Salmonella-based vaccines , ( reviewed in [ 116 ] ) . 
One of the first strategies was the generation of recombinant Salmonella strains expressing enzymes that convert a nontoxic prodrug into a toxic compound to tumor cells . 
For example , S. typhimurium expressing the gene encoding the prodrug-activating enzyme carboxypeptidase G2 ( CPG2 ) , showed an enhanced antitumor activity after bacterial colonization of tumors and administration of the prodrug [ 136 ] . 
Bacterial toxins are used in bacteria-mediated cancer therapy as their expression , secretion and functionality are easier to realize than the expression of eukaryotic proteins . 
For example , the bacterial toxins Colicin E3 ( ColE3 ) [ 137 ] and cytolysin HlyE [ 138 ] were expressed in S. typhimurium and conferred higher antitumor efficacy to the vaccines . 
Moreover , S. typhimurium expressing different immunomodulatory ligands , cytokines , and chemokines have been investigated as therapeutic molecules as further discussed in the section on adjuvants . 
Conclusion & future perspective
Our detailed molecular understanding of the virulence mechanisms of S. enterica , in conjunction with the broad array of molecular tools for the genetic manipulation of this species , provide an excellent basis for future development of live vaccine carriers . 
Whether DNA vaccine delivery by attenuated Salmonella strains or the presentation or translocation of heterologous vaccine antigens is more efficient , has to be shown by comparative , quantitative analyses . 
Although many of the new strategies that deploy live attenuated Salmonella as vaccine carriers lead to promising results in animal models of vaccination , the transfer of these approaches to human vaccination is likely to be a major obstacle . 
The current limitations include the limited number of S. typhi-based carrier strains that are available for applications in humans , the differences in the repertoire of virulence determinants and the difference in the immunity of murine systemic Salmonella infections and human typhoid fever . 
The delicate balance in live attenuated vaccines between immuno-stimulatory potential and safety requires careful selection of new S. typhi carrier strains . 
If these requirements have been met , the life carrier approach should allow a very versatile , rapid and cost efficient way to respond to future needs for new vaccines . 
Acknowledgements
We thank Deepak Chikkaballi for revison, and the reviewers for their constructive criticism of the manuscript.
Financial & competing interests disclosure This work was supported by grants HE1964 from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft to M Hensel and a post-graduate fellowship from the DAAD to WAH Hegazy . 
The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript . 
This includes employment , consultancies , honoraria , stock ownership or options , expert testimony , grants or patents received or pending , or royalties . 
No writing assistance was utilized in the production of this manuscript .