R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 
Open Access 
Quantification and accurate normalisation of small
RNAs through new custom RT-qPCR arrays 
demonstrates Salmonella-induced microRNAs in 
human monocytes 
Soroush Sharbati * , Jutta Sharbati , Lena Hoeke , Marc Bohmer and Ralf Einspanier 
Abstract 
Background : Small interfering and non-coding RNAs regulate gene expression across all kingdoms of life . 
MicroRNAs constitute an important group of metazoan small RNAs regulating development but also disease . 
Accordingly , in functional genomics microRNA expression analysis sheds more and more light on the dynamic regulation of gene expression in various cellular processes . 
Results : We have developed custom RT-qPCR arrays allowing for accurate quantification of 31 small RNAs in triplicate using a 96 well format . 
In parallel , we provide accurate normalisation of microRNA expression data based on the quantification of 5 reference snRNAs . 
We have successfully employed such arrays to study microRNA regulation during human monocyte differentiation as well as Salmonella infection . 
Besides well-known protagonists such as miR-146 or miR-155 , we identified the up-regulation of miR-21 , miR-222 , miR-23b , miR-24 , miR-27a as well as miR-29 upon monocyte differentiation or infection , respectively . 
Conclusions : The provided protocol for RT-qPCR arrays enables straight-forward microRNA expression analysis . 
It is fully automatable , compliant with the MIQE guidelines and can be completed in only 1 day . 
The application of these arrays revealed microRNAs that may mediate monocyte host defence mechanisms by regulating the TGF-b signalling upon Salmonella infection . 
The introduced arrays are furthermore suited for customised quantification of any class of small non-coding RNAs as exemplified by snRNAs and thus provide a versatile tool for ubiquitous applications . 
Keywords : microRNA , RT-qPCR , array , normalisation , isomiR , Salmonella , macrophage 
Background
Metazoan regulation of gene expression relies on an interwoven network of e.g. DNA methylation , transcription factors , mRNA degradation or translational control . 
Recent research has shown that translational regulation as well as mRNA degradation is controlled by RNA interference ( RNAi ) . 
The main class of intrinsic small regulating RNAs concerting these effects in eukaryotes is constituted of microRNAs ( miRNAs ) . 
Mature miRNAs ( about 20 nt length ) derive from a hairpin . 
The active strand is loaded to an Argonaute family protein to form the miRNA induced silencing complex ( miRISC ) , which 
Institute of Veterinary Biochemistry , Freie Universitaet Berlin , Berlin , Germany recognises the target site within a 3 ' UTR . 
Animal miR-ISC was originally thought to repress target translation rather than mRNA degradation . 
However , recent data suggest that mRNA degradation may be the predominant mode of miRNA mediated regulation of gene expression [ 1 ] . 
Accordingly , various studies have shown negatively correlated expression of miRNAs and their targets [ 2,3 ] . 
Based on these observations , in silico tools such as MAGIA [ 4 ] were developed to link target prediction to the expression analysis of miRNAs and their target mRNAs . 
Connecting negatively correlated miRNA and target mRNA expression with target prediction allows for the identification of aberrations in miRNA mediated regulation among various disease related pathways . 
The role of miRNA mediated gene regulation in development and disease such as cancer or viral infections was recognised very early . 
However , very recent studies suggest that miRNAs are also involved in the specific host response to bacterial pathogens such as Mycobacteria or Salmonella [ 5-8 ] . 
In this regard , integrated miRNA - as well as mRNA-transcriptome analysis by means of microarrays and reverse transcription quantitative PCR ( RT-qPCR ) allowed us to show that in mycobacterial infections of human macrophages caspases 3 and 7 are under the control of let-7e and miR-29a , respectively [ 8 ] . 
Many methods such as microarrays , RNAseq or RT-qPCR are used to study mRNA as well as miRNA expression of cells or tissues under a given condition . 
Quantification of miRNAs but also other small non-coding RNAs by means of RT-qPCR was established during the last decade based on several detection strategies . 
In this regard , we developed a protocol called miR-Q , which relies on reverse transcription ( RT ) of miRNAs using specific oligonucleotides . 
The generated cDNA is quantified by means of a novel qPCR protocol using three oligonucleotides based on SYBR Green detection chemistry [ 9 ] . 
The protocol can easily be customised to detect and quantify any class of non-coding small RNAs . 
Besides the frequent application of miR-Q in our lab , the protocol was adopted by others for quantification of small RNAs e.g. in immunity - , virus - , metabolism - or cancer-related RNAi research [ 10-13 ] . 
The miR-Q protocol enables highly specific quantification of single miRNAs providing a high sensitivity . 
Since RT-qPCR remains the gold-stan-dard for accurate quantification of gene expression , such arrays are increasingly employed for mid-throughput quantification of gene expression providing high sensitivity coupled with accuracy . 
While arrayed quantification of mRNAs is performed easily , the short length of miRNAs and underlying detection chemistries require wellconceived strategies . 
A few commercial miRNA RT-qPCR arrays are currently available , which are rather costly . 
Based on the stem-looped qPCR approach of Applied Biosystems Tang and colleagues reported the 220-plex miRNA expression of a single cell [ 14 ] . 
Another group reported a multiplex quantification of miRNAs involving the purification of multiplex PCR amplicons followed by uniplex analysis on microfluidic chips [ 15 ] . 
However , until today there are no non-commercial and custom protocols for miRNA RT-qPCR arrays . 
This prompted us to advance the existing miR-Q protocol allowing more versatile and fully automatable arrayed quantification of any class of eukaryotic small non-coding RNAs . 
Compliant with the MIQE guidelines and nomenclature [ 16 ] , we provide here a reliable and cost-effective method enabling arrayed quantification combined with accurate normalisation of miRNA expression . 
* Correspondence : sharbati@zedat.fu-berlin.de 
© 2012 Sharbati et al ; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. . 
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0 ) , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited 
Results and discussion
Multiplexed reverse transcription of miRNAs enables miR-Q arrays After the miR-Q approach was established and published , several labs worldwide approved its performance for their research by adopting the protocol . 
Over the course of the last three years we further established miR-Q assays for several miRNAs according to different research projects [ 8,17,18 ] . 
Another 21 newly established assays are presented here for the first time including a set of five snRNA specific assays serving as reference genes . 
Taken together , we have developed 44 small RNA specific miR-Q assays and the particular oligonucleotide sequences are presented in table 1 . 
As reported earlier [ 9 ] , we usually determine the dynamic range of miR-Qs by spiking bacterial total RNA with serial dilutions of synthetic miRNA in single assays ( 2 nM-2 fM final concentration regarding the RT-qPCR ) . 
Most miR-Q assays possess a dynamic range of 5 to 6 orders of magnitude . 
According to our experience the lower spectrum of calibration curves however corresponds to the naturally occurring and physiological miRNA concentration of a cell . 
Therefore , we determined the Y-inter-cept , slope and r2 for all presented miRNA specific assays ranging from 20 pM to 20 nM ( Additional file 1 ) . 
The dynamic range of reference snRNA specific assays was determined in a range between 100 and 0.01 ng cDNA . 
As it is shown in Figure 1 , all assays possessed proper efficiencies calculated from the slopes of calibration curves . 
Figure 1 moreover shows that there was no statistically significant difference between the efficiencies of miRNA - and reference snRNA-specific miR-Q assays proven by a paired t test ( P = 0.6836 ) . 
According to our experience , methods such as microarrays or next-generation-sequencing can be applied for the generation of snap shots of a cell or tissue miRNAome [ 8,19 ] . 
However , we were interested in a fast , cost-effective , feasible and accurate alternative . 
Accordingly , we advanced the conventional miR-Q protocol and reaction conditions allowing increased performance of miRNA RT-qPCR arrays ( miR-Q arrays ) . 
For this purpose , we evaluated multiplexed RT reactions with different numbers of specific RT oligonucleotides per reaction ( RT6 - 'm iRNA ' ) and varying respective final concentrations . 
In contrast to the conventional miR-Q RT , the reaction time was extended and a higher amount of reverse transcriptase was used for the miR-Q arrays . 
A 31-plex RT turned out to be most suita-ble because it allowed detection of the respective number of small RNAs and negative controls ( NC ) measured in triplicate when using a 96-well format . 
A miR-Q array layout is exemplified in Figure 2A . 
This layout allowed the detection of 26 different miRNAs within the same PCR run and simultaneously quantifying the expression of 5 additional reference snRNAs ( SNORD44 , 47 , 48 , 52 an 
RNU6 ) serving for normalisation of miRNA expression . 
Differently composed layouts were performed resulting in no composition-based bias ( data not shown ) . 
Multiplexed RT reactions furthermore provide harmonised conversion efficiency of miRNAs as well as reference snRNAs and are a prerequisite for reliable normalisation of expression . 
We used total RNA isolated from differentiated human THP-1 to prove the repeatability of miR-arrays . 
Figure 2B shows the triplicate Cq values using the layout shown in Figure 2A . 
Except for 10 miRNAs ( let-7 family , miR-106a , miR-141 , miR-143 , miR-145 , miR-27a and miR-29b ) all other miRNAs and reference snRNAs were detected in differentiated THP-1 showing minor Cq variation in triplicate measurements and demonstrating strong repeatability of miR-Q arrays ( Figure 2B ) . 
Commercially available RT-qPCR arrays often employ single measurement for individual miRNAs , so that the lack of intra-array replicates weakens the repeatability of assessed data . 
Furthermore , there is no opportunity to evaluate if an undetermined Cq is based on target absence or failed reaction . 
For generation of highly reliable results we encourage intra-array triplicate measurements of each target . 
Table 1 Oligonucleotides for miR-Q arrays miRNA RT6 - 'm iRNA ' 
'm iRNA ' - rev 
Ref . 
[ 9 ] 
let-7a tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtaactat let-7b tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtaaccac 
cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtgaggtagtaggttgtata 
cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtgaggtagtaggttgtgtg 
[ 9 ] 
let-7c let-7e 
tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtaaccat tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtaactat tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtactata tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggttcatag tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggttacctg 
cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtgaggtagtaggttgtatg cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtgaggtaggaggttgt cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtgaggtagtagattgtat cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgagcagcattgtacaggg cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgaaaagtgcttacagtg 
[ 9 ] [ 8 ] 
let-7f miR-103a miR-106a 
This study [ 17 ] This study 
miR-141 miR-143 
tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtccatct tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggttgagct tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtaaggga tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtaaccca tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtagccta 
cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtaacactgtctggtaaag cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtgagatgaagcactgt cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcggtccagttttcccaggaa cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtgagaactgaattcca cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtgagaactgaattccata 
[ 9 ] 
This stu [ 9 ] [ 8 ] [ 8 ] 
dy 
miR-145 miR-146a miR-146b-5p 
miR-148a miR-155 miR-15b miR-16 miR-181a 
tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtacaaag tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtacccct tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggttgtaaa tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtcgccaa tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtcaccga 
cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtcagtgcactacagaa cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgttaatgctaatcgtgat cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtagcagcacatcatggttt cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtagcagcacgtaaata cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgaacattcaacgctg 
This study [ 8 ] This study [ 9 ] [ 9 ] 
miR-191 miR-200c miR-21 miR-214 miR-222 
cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgcaacggaatcccaaaa cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtaatactgccgggtaa cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtagcttatcagactga cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgacagcaggcacagacagg cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgagctacatctggctactg 
tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtagctgc tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtccatca tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggttcaaca tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtactgcc tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtgagacc 
This study [ 9 ] [ 9 ] This study This study 
miR-22-3p miR-23b miR-24 miR-27a miR-296-3p 
cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgaagctgccagttgaagaac cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgatcacattgccaggg cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtggctcagttcagcag cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgttcacagtggctaag cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcggagggttgggtggaggc 
tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtacagtt tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtgctggtaat tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtctgttc tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtgcggaa tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtaggarag 
This study [ 9 ] [ 9 ] [ 9 ] This study 
miR-29a miR-29b miR-29c miR-30a miR-30b 
cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtagcaccatctgaaatcgg cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtagcaccatttgaaatcagt cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtagcaccatttgaaatcgg cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtgtaaacatcctcgactgg cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtgtaaacatcctacactca 
tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggttaaccg tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtaacact tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggttaaccg tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtcttcca tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtagctga 
[ 8 ] 
This study This study This study This study 
miR-30c miR-326 
cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtgtaaacatcctacactctc cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgcctctgggcccttc cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgactcaaactgtggg cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgagctcggtctgaggc cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgaaaccgttaccattactgag 
tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtgctgag tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtctggag tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtagtgcc tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggttgaggg tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtaaactc 
This study [ 9 ] This study [ 9 ] [ 9 ] 
miR-371-5p miR-423-3p miR-451 
miR-484 
cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgtcaggctcagtcccct cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaacggcgcgggtcggagttagctc cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggtgctcgcttcggcagc cgtcagatgtccgagtagaggcctggatgatgataagcaaatg cgtcagatgtccgagtagaggaaccaatgatgtaatgattctgc 
tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtatcggg tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccgtgagtggtccgctt tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccaaaaatat tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccagtcag tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccaacctc 
[ 9 ] [ 8 ] 
miR-886-5p RNU6 SNORD44 SNORD47 
This study This study This study 
SNORD48 tgtcaggcaaccgtattcaccggtcag cgtcagatgtccgagtagaggagtgatgatgaccccaggta This study SNORD52 tgtcaggcaaccgtattcacctcagaa cgtcagatgtccgagtagagggggaatgatgatttcacagact This study 
The table comprises oligonucleotides for reverse transcription ( RT6 - 'm iRNA ' ) as well as the specific primers for qPCR detection ( 'm iRNA ' - rev ) . 
MiRNA-specific nucleotides are indicated in bold letters , while binding sites of terminal primers ( MP-fw : tgtcaggcaaccgtattcacc and MP-rev : cgtcagatgtccgagtagagg ) are indicated in italic . 
A set of 5 snRNAs allows for accurate normalisation of miRNA expression Accurate normalisation of gene expression measures is a crucial process that controls for bias based on extraction yield , RT yield and amplification efficiency . 
This step is the basic prerequisite for comparing gene expression values among different samples [ 16 ] . 
For normalisation of miR-Q array data , we have designed assays for a set of 5 snRNAs : SNORD44 , SNORD47 , SNORD48 , SNORD52 and RNU6 . 
We tested for applicability of these reference snRNAs using human primary macrophages from three independent donors that were infected with Mycobacter-ium avium hominissuis or remained non-infected described in a previous study [ 8 ] . 
As shown in Figure 3A , all reference snRNAs were detected among the three donors showing minor Cq variation in samples ( infected ) and calibrators ( non-infected ) while all negative controls ( NC ) remained negative across 40 cycles . 
Melting curve analysis proved all amplicons to be specific ( Figure 3B ) and RT negative controls revealed the absence of contaminating genomic DNA ( data not shown ) . 
For evaluating the stability of the chosen reference snRNAs among donors as well as samples and calibrators , we have plotted Cq values of samples versus calibrators ( Figure 3C ) . 
The correlation analysis revealed high linearity between Cq sample and Cq calibrator possessing a coefficient of determination close to 1 ( r2 = 0.9788 and P < 0.0001 ) and pointing to excellent stability of all reference snRNA . 
This result was also verified by calculating the geNorm stability measure M [ 20 ] . 
For this purpose , fold differences were calculated from ΔCq between samples and calibrators . 
The calculated M values for the entire set were below 0.5 ( MSNORD44 = 0.37 ; MSNORD47 = 0.41 ; MSNORD48 = 0.44 ; MSNORD52 = 0.3 ; MRNU6 = 0.31 ) pointing also to high stability of presented reference genes and underlining the correlation analysis . 
This set of 5 reference snRNAs was also highly stable in other macrophages as well as intestinal samples ( data not shown ) . 
For comparative quantification analysis based on the ΔΔCq algorithm we emphasise the evaluation of the stability of reference snRNAs in the studied samples as described above . 
The geometric mean of the most stable candidates among the set of 5 can then be chosen for normalisation of miRNA expression values ( ΔCq = Cq miRoI-Cq norm ) . 
We encourage the use of at least 3 reference snRNAs for normalisation of miRNA expression . 
miR-Q arrays are highly reproducible and accurate A measure for high reproducibility of RT-qPCR arrays is the evaluation of inter-assay variance . 
We assessed the reproducibility of miR-Q arrays by performing RT reaction from 6 independently differentiated THP-1 passages that were measured on 6 independent miR-Q array runs . 
For this purpose , THP-1 monocytes were differentiated into macrophages and after 28 h samples were taken and RT reactions were performed in parallel . 
This introduced experiment outlines a dual challenge to determine the reproducibility since independent biological samples were employed for determination of the inter-assay var-iance . 
Figure 4A shows the inter-assay distribution of normalised values ( ΔCq = Cq miRoI - Cq norm ) of 6 replicates each representing the mean of triplicate intra-assay measurement . 
As mentioned above the value Cq norm was calculated as the geometric mean of the set of 5 stable reference snRNAs . 
In consistence with the data shown in Figure 2B , 10 miRNAs were not expressed in differentiated THP-1 , or were below the detection limit . 
As shown by the box plots in Figure 4 , the other 16 showed highly constant expression among the 6 biological replicates and independent runs , respectively . 
This particularly points out the high reproducibility of miR-Q arrays but also the studied biological system . 
For comparative analyses we highly recommend performance of simultaneous RT reactions of all samples included in a study using a thermal cycler . 
The preparation of master mixes also minimises inter-assay variance . 
Additionally , we have performed spike-in experiments to check for the accuracy of the miR-Q assays . 
For this purpose , we have selected three miRNAs ( let-7e , miR-143 and miR-145 ) that were proven to be absent in differentiated THP-1 ( Figure 4A ) . 
RT reactions as performed for the validation of reproducibility were spiked with synthetic let-7e , miR-143 and miR-145 to give a final concentration in RT-qPCRs at 3.3 , 33 and 330 pM , respectively . 
According t the MIQE guidelines , accuracy of a RT-qPCR refers to the difference between experimentally measured and actual concentrations as fold difference [ 16 ] . 
Accordingly , we performed miR-Q arrays for all concentrations and determined the fold differences between 3.3 and 33 pM as well as 33 and 330 pM applying the ΔΔCq algorithm , respectively . 
The reactions revealed 12 fold difference of both let-7e and miR-143 and 20 fold difference of miR-145 between 3.3 and 33 pM spike-in ( Figure 4B ) . 
While detection of all other miRNAs remained unaffected , in the 33 pM spiked sample there was a slight cross reaction between let-7e spike-in and other let-7 family members resulting in 1.3 to 1.9 fold difference compared to the 3.3 pM control . 
Higher dosage of spike-in however led to a higher cross reaction within the let-7 family . 
As shown in Figure 4C , let-7e spike-in at a final concentration of 330 pM created 5 fold increased detection of let-7a and 6.5 fold detection of the specific target let-7e compared to the 33 pM spiked sample . 
Furthermore , there was a 22.4 fold difference of miR-143 and a 34 fold difference of miR-145 between both samples ( Figure 4C ) . 
As we discussed earlier , the higher the concentration of the spike-in , the higher is the cross reaction between the assays and paralogous targets of a miRNA family . 
These data verify the accuracy of miR-Q arrays especially at low spike-in concentrations , which rather represent cellular and physiological miRNA concentrations compared to higher concentrations producing increased cross reactivity . 
We have shown earlier that the miR-Q approach is able to accurately discriminate between the let-7 family members [ 9 ] pointing to the analytical specificity of this approach . 
Since many miRNA families exist and their members often possess few nucleotide exchanges , we examined the discriminative power of miR-Q by studying the intra-family-interaction exemplified by miR-29 and miR-30 family members . 
The cross reaction between the specific miR-Q and a paralogous miRNA target was determined along the entire dynamic range of assays . 
It was intriguing that a two nucleotide mismatch within the miRNA specific part of a ` miRNA ' - rev oligonucleotide and a paralogous miRNA target resulted in less than 0.25 % cross reactivity of assays to false targets . 
When the non-specific target differed only in one nucleotide the cross reaction varied between 10 and 20 % ( Figure 5A and 5B ) . 
This observation was true for the miR-29 as well as miR-30 family . 
Although the determined values point out the high target-specificity of miR-Q assays , in one mismatch cases it has to be considered that around 10 % of the measured expression value may be derived from paralogous miRNAs of a family . 
Since the ` miRNA ' - rev oligonucleotides ( table 1 ) confer the specificity of miR-Q assays ; the respective design determines the magnitude of cross reactivity and the analytical specificity . 
For mini-mising cross reactivity of miR-Q assays and if possible we suggest designing mismatched base pairing at the 3 ' OH of the ` miRNA ' - rev oligonucleotides . 
However , the respective target recognising part of the reverse primer has to be as long as possible to ensure proper hybridisation at 60 °C . 
Nevertheless , while designing a new miR-Q assay , one has to take into account that an overlap of more than 3 nucleotides between RT6 - 'm iRNA ' and ` miRNA ' - rev should be avoided because it results in high background of assays . 
Recent deep sequencing efforts of small RNAs have shown that many mature miRNAs are either trimmed alternatively resulting in 5 ' and 3 ' variations or additional 3 ' non-template adenosines or uridines are transferred by nucleotidyl transferases post-transcriptionally [ 21 ] . 
These variants of the canonical miRNA are often referred to as ` isomiRs ' . 
We were interested how far the miR-Q approach is biased toward detecting only the canonical mature miRNA without any additions or if it is possible to quantify the whole population of a given miRNA including isomiRs . 
Therefore , we performed additional experiments evaluating the bias of our approach by non-template ade-nosines or uridines present at the 3 ' end of non-canonical isomiRs based on miR-24 variants . 
Recently , this miRNA was shown to possess additional 3 ' adenosine or uridine modifications [ 22 ] . 
We performed comparative and paralleled spike-in experiments using synthetic canonical miR-24 as well as the A or U isomiRs , respectively . 
As it is shown in Figure 5C , the design of the miR-Q approach allowed the detection of isomiRs regardless of an additional adenosine or uridine . 
All variants were detected over the same linear range proving the coverage of the entire population . 
We outlined a correlation matrix by computing the Pearson correlation coefficient ( r ) for every pair of data sets . 
The analysis revealed high linearity between all data sets possessing r < 0.9969 and two-tailed P values < 0.0001 ( Figure 5D ) . 
The miR-Q approach provides an advantage over other detection chemistries based e.g. on hairpin reverse primers allowing to capture the entire expression of a given miRNA including the canonical molecule as well as isomiRs . 
Figure 1 Efficiency of miR-Q assays . 
The Tukey box plots show the efficiencies of 39 miRNA - as well as 5 reference snRNA-specific miR-Q assays . 
A paired t test proved that there was no statistically significant difference between the efficiencies of miRNA - and reference snRNA-specific miR-Q assays ( P = 0.6836 ) . 
Figure 2 Arrayed quantification of miRNAs using a 96 well format . 
A miR-Q array layout is exemplified in Figure 2A using a 96-well format . 
This layout provides triplicate quantification of 26 miRNAs , 5 reference snRNAs and negative controls ( NC ) . 
Figure 2B shows the Cq variations of triplicate measurements using 1 μg total RNA from differentiated THP-1 . 
Rhombi indicate the individual measurements of each assay , while their mean is given as black lines . 
Black rhombi represent assays possessing specific products and blue rhombi show unspecific detection . 
The SYBR Green background is given as red dotted line 
Figure 3 Normalisation of miR-Q arrays using a set of 5 
reference snRNAs . 
Triplicate detection of reference snRNAs ( SNORD44 , SNORD47 , SNORD48 , SNORD52 and RNU6 ) in human primary macrophages of three independent donors that were infected ( samples ) with Mycobacterium avium hominissuis or remained non-infected ( calibrators ) is shown Figure 3A . 
The measurement revealed minor Cq variation in samples and calibrators while all negative controls ( NC ) remained negative across 40 cycles . 
Light colours represent the infected samples and dark colours the non-infected calibrators . 
Figure 3B shows melting curves proving the specificity of all amplicons . 
Dissociation analysis was performed by initial denaturation at 95 °C for 1 min , amplicon hybridisation at 60 °C for 2 min and melting by ramping from 60 °C to 95 °C at 2 °C / min and acquiring the fluorescence signal . 
Figure 3C evaluates the stability of the chosen reference snRNAs among donors as well as samples ( infected ) and calibrators ( non-infected ) as demonstrated by the coefficient of determination r2 = 0.9788 ( P < 0.0001 ) . 
Figure 4 Reproducibility and accuracy of miR-Q arrays . 
Tukey box plots in Figure 4A show the inter-assay distribution of normalised values ( ΔCq = Cq miRoI-Cq norm ) of the 6 replicates . 
Each value was calculated as the mean of triplicate intra-assay measurements . 
Standard deviations ( SD ) of 6 replicates are given adjacent to the box plots . 
According to the MIQE guidelines we determined the accuracy of miR-Q arrays by spiking total RNA samples with 3.3 , 33 and 330 pM synthetic miRNA ( let-7e , miR-143 and miR-145 ) . 
Fold differences between 3.3 and 33 pM ( figure 4B ) as well as 33 and 330 pM ( figure 4C ) were determined applying the ΔΔCq algorithm 
Figure 5 Analytical specificity of miR-Q arrays . 
Figure 5A shows the alignment of miR-29 as well as miR-30 family members . 
Dashed borders indicate binding sites of ` miRNA ' - rev primers . 
The percentage of cross reaction is given between assay-specific and unspecific miRNA targets . 
Assay-specific targets represent the full value ( Figure 5B ) . 
The design of the miR-Q approach allows simultaneous quantification of a canonical miRNA as well as its isomiRs as exemplified by miR-24 ( Figure 5C ) . 
The columns in Figure 5C show triplicate determination of the linear range using synthetic miR-24 as well as synthetic isomiRs . 
Pearson correlation analysis revealed high linearity between all data sets possessing r < 0.9969 and two-tailed P values < 0.0001 ( Figure 5D ) . 
Salmonella infection of human macrophages results in specific miRNA response proven by miR-Q arrays The developed protocol was employed to investigate miRNA regulation in monocyte differentiation after PMA treatment as well as Salmonella infection . 
We studied miRNA regulation in three groups using the monocytic THP-1 as a differentiation model . 
The first group consisted of monocytic THP-1 cells that were stimulated with viable Salmonella . 
The second group represented macrophages derived from PMA treated THP-1 , while the third was composed of differentiated macrophages that were infected with viable Salmonella . 
All groups were compared to the untreated controls performing triplicate measurements of triplicate biological samples . 
The correlation coefficients between the entire set of reference snRNAs of samples and controls ranged from 0.9884 to 0.9997 pointing out the high linearity and stabi-lity of the chosen reference snRNAs . 
All three treatments resulted in up-regulation of miR-146a / b from 5 to more than 10 fold ( Figure 6 ) , while only PMA treatment increased the miR-155 expression 3 fold . 
These results are consistent with the study of Taganov and colleagues , who reported comparable up-regulation of these miRNAs [ 23 ] . 
It furthermore underlines the accuracy of the presented protocol . 
Interestingly , miR-222 , miR-21 and miR-24 were up-regulated after differentiation while 2 h stimulation of monocytes with viable Salmonella did not affect their expression ( Figure 6 ) . 
All three miRNAs were recently reported to play roles in monocyte differentiation into macrophages as well as dendritic cells [ 24,25 ] . 
While miR-23b possessed averaged 1.4 fold decreased expression 2 h post Salmonella infection of monocytic THP-1 , PMA treatment increased its expression more than 2 fold in both groups . 
This is the first study reporting miR-23b dysregulation in monocyte stimulation and differentiation . 
Down-regulation of miR-23b was related to activation of the TGF-b1 / Smad3 signalling pathway in hepatocytes [ 26 ] . 
TGF-b on the other hand is known to be a monocyte activator triggering cytokine production and mediating host defence [ 27 ] . 
Therefore , we hypothesise a miR-23b dependent TGF-b regulation in monocytes encountering pathogens or pathogen-associated molecular patterns ( PAMPs ) leading to host defence mechanisms . 
We found miR-27a to be only up-regulated in differentiated and infected THP-1 . 
While miR-27a / b were recently reported to have antiviral effects in murine primary macrophages [ 28 ] , this is the first study reporting increased expression of monocytic miR-27a upon Salmo-nella interaction . 
Accordingly , differentiation of THP-1 into macrophages led to more than 3 fold increased expression of miR-29a and miR-29c . 
The miR-29 family turns out to be a key regulator in host immune response to bacterial pathogens as it was recently shown to control the immune response to intracellular bacteria by targeting interferon-g and to regulate apoptosis of primary human macrophages in mycobacterial infections [ 6,8 ] . 
Conclusions
The presented approach is the first custom and noncommercial protocol for RT-qPCR arrays based on a miRNA specific RT-qPCR called miR-Q . 
The developed miR-Q arrays enable reliable and feasible quantification of small non-coding RNAs as exemplified by miRNA expression analysis during monocyte differentiation and infection . 
On one hand , well known miRNA dysregulation verified the accuracy of the presented method . 
On the other hand , several dysregulated miRNAs were newl identified in differentiated as well as infected human monocytes by means of the presented method and will provide a basis for our future studies . 
Methods Cell culture and RNA isolation
The human acute monocytic leukemia cell line THP-1 ( DSMZ ACC 16 ) was cultured in suspension using RPMI 1640 ( Biochrom AG ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum superior ( Biochrom AG ) and 10 μg / ml gentamicin ( Biochrom AG ) and was passaged twice weekly . 
THP-1 were in vitro differentiated into macrophages by adding 250 ng/ml phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate ( PMA ) . 
Differentiated cells were lysed after 28 h and total RNA was isolated using the miRVana Isolation Kit ( Life Technologies ) . 
RNA integrity numbers ( RIN ) were determined using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer and RNA Nano Chips ( Agilent ) . 
All RNA isolations used in this study possessed RINs higher than 9 . 
Infection experiments
Monocytic THP-1 were seeded in 6-well plates without gentamicin at a density of 5 × 105 cells per well . 
Afterwards , they were stimulated with viable Salmonella sero-var Typhymurium DT104 at a multiplicity of infection ( MOI ) of 10 in triplicate . 
2 h post stimulation adherent as well as non-adherent cells were washed twice with warm PBS and lysed for total RNA isolation . 
Non-treated THP-1 served as controls . 
Macrophages derived from monocytic THP-1 were also infected with Salmonella serovar Typhymurium DT104 . 
For this purpose , 3.5 × 105 cells per well were seeded in 6-well plates and differentiated as described above . 
Macrophages remained either non-infected or were infected with exponentialphase Salmonella serovar Typhymurium DT104 at an MOI of 10 . 
2 h post infection supernatants were removed and adherent cells were washed twice with warm PBS . 
Adherent macrophages were lysed and total RNA was isolated as described above . 
Oligonucleotides
All miRNA specific oligonucleotides for RT as well as qPCR were designed as described earlier [ 9 ] and were synthesised and HPLC purified by Metabion AG and Eurogentec Deutschland GmbH . 
The miRNA sequences were taken from the miRNA database miRBase 17 [ 29 ] . 
Individual and multiplexed reverse transcription RT of miRNAs for single RT-qPCR was performed as described earlier [ 9 ] . 
For multiplexed RT , a pool of miRNA - as well as reference snRNA-specific DNA-oligo-nucleotide ( RT6 - 'm iRNA ' or RT6 - 's nRNA ' and the RevertAid ™ M-MuLV Reverse Transcriptase ( Fermentas GmbH ) were employed to transcribe miRNAs and reference snRNAs into cDNA . 
The RT-6-Pool represented a blend of DNA-oligonucleotides specific for 26 miRNAs as well as 5 snRNAs serving as reference genes for normalisation . 
The final concentration of the RT-6-Pool wa 
Figure 6 Salmonella infection of human monocytes reveals a specific miRNA response . 
MiRNA regulation is shown in three groups using the monocytic THP-1 as a differentiation model . 
Fold differences between differently treated THP-1 and untreated controls are shown . 
Columns filled with small squares show monocytic THP-1 stimulated with viable Salmonella . 
Columns filled with big squares represent macrophages derived from PMA treated THP-1 and striped columns represent the third group being composed of differentiated macrophages that were infected with viable Salmonella . 
The bars indicate the SD of triplicate experiments each measured in triplicate . 
The green dashed area indicates balanced expression between samples and control . 
1 μM representing 32.3 nM of each DNA-oligonucleo-tide . 
The reaction was performed in 200 μl PCR tubes using the Veriti ® Thermal Cycler ( Life Technologies ) . 
Between 500 ng and 1 μg total RNA and 1 μl of the RT-6-Pool was first prepared in a 5 μl volume . 
The mixture was incubated at 70 °C for 5 min and chilled on ice . 
After adding 5 × RT-Buffer , 1 mM dNTPs and 200 U Reverse Transcriptase , the volume was adjusted to 10 μl by add-ing nuclease-free water . 
The reaction was started at 37 °C for 5 min followed by 42 °C for 2 h . 
The enzyme was inactivated by heating at 95 °C for 5 min . 
Afterwards the cDNA pool was cooled down for at least 1 min on ice and 90 μl of nuclease-free water was added yielding the template for qPCR arrays . 
RT reactions serving for comparative analyses were always run in parallel using identical amounts of total RNA . 
Additional material 
Additional file 1 : Quality control of presented miR-Q assays . 
RT-qPCR arrays and conventional miR-Q
Arrayed triplicate measurement of 26 miRNAs and 5 reference snRNAs was performed in 10 μl final reaction volume by means of SYBR Green detection chemistry using the SensiMix SYBR Hi-ROX Kit ( Bioline GmbH ) and the Step One Plus Cycler ( Life Technologies ) . 
All reactions were carried out using clear MicroAmp ® Fast 96-Well Reaction Plates ( Life Technologies ) that were sealed with adhesive films . 
Firstly , a master mix was prepared in a 945 μl volume consisting of 2 × SensiMix SYBR Hi-ROX , 100 nM of each universal primer ( MP-fw and MP-rev ) and 100 μl of diluted RT-reaction . 
After dispen-sing 9 μl of the master mix in wells of a 96 well plate , 1 μl of each miRNA - or snRNA-specific reverse primer ( 'm iRNA or snRNA ' - rev ) was added to respective wells of the array at a final concentration of 5 nM . 
The amplification was carried out via the first step at 95 °C for 10 min , followed by 40 cycles with 15 s at 95 °C , 20 s at 60 °C and 20 s at 72 °C . 
The fluorescence signal was acquired at 60 °C . 
Quality control was performed by subsequent melting curve analysis by 95 °C for 1 min , 60 °C for 2 min , ramping from 60 °C to 95 °C at 2 °C / min and acquiring the signal . 
Samples containing water instead of the specific ` miRNA or snRNA ' - rev primer served as negative controls ( NC ) . 
Conventional miR-Q was performed as described previously [ 9 ] . 
Normalisation of miRNA expression and comparative quantification Normalisation of miRNA expression was performed using a set of snRNAs : SNORD44 ( NR_002750 .2 ) , SNORD47 ( NR_002746 .1 ) , SNORD48 ( NR_002745 .1 ) , SNORD52 ( NR_002742 .2 ) and RNU6 ( NR_004394 ) . 
After calculating the Cq mean of each reference snRNA , the Cq geometric mean of all reference snRNAs was used to normalise the miRNA expression values . 
The difference between the Cq of the miRNA of interest ( Cq miRoI ) and the calculated geometric mean ( Cq norm ) was calculated yielding the ΔCq sample or ΔCq calibrator , respectively . 
The relative quantification ( ΔΔCq ) was performed by determining the difference between ΔCq sample and ΔCq calibrator . 
Fold differences were determined by calculating 2 to the power of-ΔΔCq . 
Calculated parameters (e.g. slopes, Y-intercepts and r2) for all presented miR-Q assays are given according to the MIQE guidelines.
Acknowledgements and funding
The authors are grateful to Barbara Kutz-Lohroff for excellent technical assistance . 
Furthermore we thank Dr. Pawel Janczyk for providing Salmonella serovar Typhimurium DT104 . 
This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( SH 465/1 -1 and SFB 852 project B4 ) . 
Authors’ contributions
SS conceived the study , performed experiments and analyses , wrote and edited the manuscript . 
JS contributed to the experiment design , data analysis and writing of the manuscript . 
LH and MB performed experiments . 
RE contributed to the writing of the manuscript . 
All authors read and approved the final manuscript . 
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests . 
Received: 5 September 2011 Accepted: 16 January 2012 Published: 16 January 2012
References 
1 . 
Huntzinger E , Izaurralde E : Gene silencing by microRNAs : contributions of translational repression and mRNA decay . 
Nat Rev Genet 2011 , 12 ( 2 ) :99 -110 . 
2 . 
Brennecke J , Stark A , Russell RB , Cohen SM : Principles of microRNA-target recognition . 
PLoS Biol 2005 , 3 ( 3 ) : e85 . 
3 . 
Farh KK , Grimson A , Jan C , Lewis BP , Johnston WK , Lim LP , Burge CB , Bartel DP : The widespread impact of mammalian MicroRNAs on mRNA repression and evolution . 
Science 2005 , 310 ( 5755 ) :1817 -1821 . 
4 . 
Sales G , Coppe A , Bisognin A , Biasiolo M , Bortoluzzi S , Romualdi C : MAGIA , a web-based tool for miRNA and Genes Integrated Analysis . 
Nucleic acids research 2010 , , 38 Suppl : 352-359 . 
5 . 
Guenin-Mace L , Carrette F , Asperti-Boursin F , Le Bon A , Caleechurn L , Di Bartolo V , Fontanet A , Bismuth G , Demangel C : Mycolactone impairs T cell homing by suppressing microRNA control of L-selectin expression . 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2011 , 108 ( 31 ) :12833 -12838 . 
6 . 
Ma F , Xu S , Liu X , Zhang Q , Xu X , Liu M , Hua M , Li N , Yao H , Cao X : The microRNA miR-29 controls innate and adaptive immune responses to intracellular bacterial infection by targeting interferon-gamma . 
Nature immunology 2011 , 12 ( 9 ) :861 -869 . 
7 . 
Schulte LN , Eulalio A , Mollenkopf HJ , Reinhardt R , Vogel J : Analysis of the host microRNA response to Salmonella uncovers the control of major cytokines by the let-7 family . 
The EMBO journal 2011 , 30 ( 10 ) :1977 -1989 . 
8 . 
Sharbati J , Lewin A , Kutz-Lohroff B , Kamal E , Einspanier R , Sharbati S : Integrated microRNA-mRNA-analysis of human monocyte derived macrophages upon Mycobacterium avium subsp . 
hominissuis infection . 
PloS one 2011 , 6 ( 5 ) : e20258 . 
9 . 
Sharbati-Tehrani S , Kutz-Lohroff B , Bergbauer R , Scholven J , Einspanier R : miR-Q : a novel quantitative RT-PCR approach for the expression profiling of small RNA molecules such as miRNAs in a complex sample . 
BMC Mol Biol 2008 , 9 ( 1 ) :34 . 
10 . 
Basso K , Sumazin P , Morozov P , Schneider C , Maute RL , Kitagawa Y , Mandelbaum J , Haddad J Jr , Chen CZ , Califano A , et al : Identification of the human mature B cell miRNome . 
Immunity 2009 , 30 ( 5 ) :744 -752