DDoowwnnllooaaddeedd ffrroomm hhttttpp : : / / / / wwwwww . . 
jjiimmmmuunnooll . . 
oorrgg / / bbyy gguueesstt oonn OOccttoobbeerr 33 , , 2200118 
Salmonella typhimurium Infection and Lipopolysaccharide Stimulation Induce Similar Changes in Macrophage Gene Expression
This information is current as of October 3 , 2018 . 
Carrie M. Rosenberger , Monisha G. Scott , Michael R. Gold , Robert E. W. Hancock and B. Brett Finlay 
J Immunol 2000 ; 164:5894 -5904 ; ; doi : 10.4049 / jimmunol .164.11.5894 
http://www.jimmunol.org/content/164/11/5894 
References This article cites 72 articles , 42 of which you can access for free at : http://www.jimmunol.org/content/164/11/5894.full#ref-list-1 
Why The JI ? 
Submit online . 
• Rapid Reviews ! 
30 days * from submission to initial decision 
• No Triage ! 
Every submission reviewed by practicing scientists 
• Fast Publication ! 
4 weeks from acceptance to publication 
* average 
Subscription 
Information about subscribing to The Journal of Immunology is online at : http://jimmunol.org/subscription 
Permissions Submit copyright permission requests at : http://www.aai.org/About/Publications/JI/copyright.html 
Email Alerts Receive free email-alerts when new articles cite this article . 
Sign up at : http://jimmunol.org/alerts 
The Journal of Immunology is published twice each month by The American Association of Immunologists , Inc. , 1451 Rockville Pike , Suite 650 , Rockville , MD 20852 Copyright © 2000 by The American Association of Immunologists All rights reserved . 
Print ISSN : 0022-1767 Online ISSN : 1550-6606 . 
S almonella species are the causative agents of typhoid fever and diarrheal diseases in humans , responsible for an estimated 16 million cases of systemic typhoid fever worldwide each year ( 1 ) . 
Salmonella typhimurium infection of mice provides a well-characterized model for the pathogenesis of human typhoid fever . 
Orally ingested bacteria penetrate the intestinal mucosa and migrate via the lymph nodes to the spleen and liver to cause systemic disease ( 2 , 3 ) . 
During bacterial infection , macrophages serve as professional phagocytes and key effectors of the innate and adaptive immune responses . 
S. typhimurium capitalizes on the macrophage 's phagocytic nature , and has been shown by confocal microscopy to reside intracellularly within macrophages , where it replicates within specialized vacuoles ( 4 ) . 
As this intracellular niche helps to shield Salmonella from host-mediated killing by components of the innate and humoral immune responses , the antimicrobial actions of infected macrophages serve a central role in determining the outcome of disease ( 5 ) . 
* Biotechnology Laboratory and † Department of Microbiology and Immunology , University of British Columbia , Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada Received for publication December 20 , 1999 . 
Accepted for publication March 21 , 2000 . 
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . 
This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . 
1 C.M.R. was supported by a Canadian Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council Post-Graduate Scholarship and M.G.S. was supported by a Medical Research Council ( MRC ) of Canada scholarship . 
This work was supported by operating grants from the Canadian Bacterial Diseases Network ( to B.B.F. and R.E.W.H. ) , and the MRC ( to B.B.F. ) . 
M.R.G. is the recipient of an MRC Scholarship , R.E.W.H. is the recipient of an MRC Distinguished Scientist Award , and B.B.F. is a Howard Hughes International Research Scholar and an MRC Scientist . 
2 Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. B. Brett Finlay , Biotechnology Laboratory , University of British Columbia , Room 237 Wesbrook Building , 6174 University Boulevard , Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada , V6T 1Z3 . 
E-mail address : bﬁnlay@unixg.ubc.ca 
In the in vivo mouse model of human typhoid fever , IFN-g is released by NK and T cells 2 -- 3 days following S. typhimurium infection . 
IFN-g is a potent stimulator of macrophage gene expression and is necessary for clearance of S. typhimurium and other intracellular bacteria ( 6 -- 8 ) . 
A variety of studies , including the use of gene arrays , have supplied a wealth of data regarding differential gene expression in response to IFN-g stimulation ( 9 , 10 ) . 
These pleiotropic effects on gene expression translate into alterations of receptor expression , Ag presentation , phagocytosis , cell proliferation , metabolism , and the antimicrobial oxidative and NO burst ( 11 , 12 ) . 
While IFN-g is thought to prime the macrophage to respond more rapidly and effectively against invading pathogens , the spectrum of genes whose expression is altered during bacterial infection in unprimed vs IFN-g-primed cells has not been extensively analyzed . 
Investigating how IFN-g activation alters the ability of S. typhimurium to affect macrophage gene expression may lead to the identiﬁcation of genes that contribute to IFN-g 's critical role during S. typhimurium infection . 
Macrophages have evolved the ability to recognize bacterial products and initiate an immune response to clear the microbe . 
An innate pattern of macrophage response is triggered by conserved bacterial products such as LPS , porins and other outer membrane proteins , ﬁmbrial proteins , ﬂagella , lipoproteins , glycoproteins , and peptidoglycan ( 13 ) . 
These bacterial components , termed modulins , signal through CD14 or other pattern recognition receptors to modulate overlapping as well as unique host cell gene expression . 
These signals help to initiate the innate and speciﬁc immune responses to clear the bacterial infection ( 14 , 15 ) . 
The bacterial surface component LPS is a potent immunostimulatory molecule that initiates both rapid changes in macrophage signaling pathways and adaptive changes in macrophage gene expression . 
LPS alters the expression of a variety of genes including transcription factors , cytokines , chemokines , receptors , and cationic antimicrobial peptides ( 16 -- 19 ) . 
Other structural components of 
Salmonella typhimurium Infection and Lipopolysaccharide 
Stimulation Induce Similar Changes in Macrophage Gene xpression1 
E 
Carrie M. Rosenberger , * † Monisha G. Scott , † Michael R. Gold , † Robert E. W. Hancock , † and B. Brett Finlay2 * † 
Changes in macrophage phenotype induced during infection result from the recognition of bacterial products as well as the action of bacterial virulence factors . 
We used the unprecedented opportunity provided by gene arrays to simultaneously study the expression of hundreds of genes during Salmonella typhimurium infection of macrophages and to assess the contribution of the bacterial virulence factor , LPS , in initiating the host responses to Salmonella . 
We found that S. typhimurium infection caused signiﬁcant changes in the expression of numerous genes encoding chemokines , cell surface receptors , signaling molecules , and transcriptional activators at 4 h postinfection of the RAW 264.7 murine macrophage cell line . 
Our results revealed changes in the expression of several genes that had not been previously implicated in the host responses to S. typhimurium infection , as well as changes in the expression of several genes previously shown to be regulated by S. typhimurium infection . 
An overlapping spectrum of genes was expressed in response to virulent S. typhimurium and puriﬁed S. typhimurium LPS , reinforcing the major role of this surface molecule in stimulating the early response of macrophages to bacterial infection . 
The macrophage gene expression proﬁle was further altered by activation with IFN-g , indicating that host cell responses depend on the activation state of the cell . 
The Journal of Immunology , 2000 , 164 : 5894 -- 5904 . 
0022-1767/00 / $ 02.00 
Copyright © 2000 by The American Association of Immunologists 
Salmonella such as porins and ﬂagella induce cytokine gene expression independently of LPS ( 20 -- 22 ) . 
To promote their survival , bacterial pathogens such as S. typhimurium secrete specialized protein effectors that induce alterations in host cells responses ( 23 ) . 
These effectors speciﬁcally affect host cell functions such as cytoskeletal architecture , vesicle trafﬁcking , cell signaling , and apo-ptosis to create a more hospitable intracellular niche ( 24 -- 28 ) . 
Most studies to date have shown how bacterial effectors modify existing host proteins rather than examining how host gene transcription is affected . 
One way to analyze both the complex interactions between host and pathogen as well as the priming effects of IFN-g is with a general approach such as gene arrays . 
Gene array technology has recently been used for a more global view of differential gene expression in such ﬁelds as inﬂammatory diseases ( 29 ) , tumor biology ( 30 ) , human cytomegalovirus infection ( 31 ) , superantigen stimulation of T cells ( 32 ) , S. cerevisiae metabolism ( 33 ) , and genetic variability of Mycobacterium tuberculosis ( 34 , 35 ) . 
One proven strength of this experimental approach has been the ability to study the expression of hundreds of genes simultaneously without biasing conclusions drawn from a subset of genes presumed to be involved in a particular process . 
We capitalized on gene array technology to obtain , for the ﬁrst time , a more comprehensive picture of how host gene expression is altered during infection by a pathogenic bacterium . 
Differential host cell gene expression was examined in an in vitro model of S. typhimurium infection using the RAW 264.7 murine macrophage cell line , a common model for the intracellular growth of S. typhimurium . 
Gene arrays were used to test two hypotheses : 1 ) that most of the gene expression changes in macrophages infected by S. typhimurium can be induced by LPS , the major constituent of S. typhimurium outer membranes , and 2 ) that the priming of macrophages by IFN - alters the spec-g trum of genes induced by S. typhimurium infection . 
We found that S. typhimurium infection altered the expression of a large number of macrophage genes and that an individual virulence factor , LPS , could itself cause many of the same changes in host gene expression . 
The macrophage gene expression proﬁle following infection was altered by priming with IFN-g , revealing how host cell activation state alters macrophage responses to bacterial infection at the molecular level . 
Materials and Methods
Bacterial and cell culture strains and growth conditions
The S. typhimurium strain SL1344 was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection ( ATCC , Manassas , VA ) and grown in Luria-Bertani broth . 
For macrophage infections , highly invasive bacterial cultures were prepared by diluting an overnight culture 1:34 in Luria-Bertani broth and subculturing aerobically with shaking for 3 h at 37 °C . 
The murine mac-rophage cell line RAW 264.7 ( ATCC ) was maintained in DMEM ( Life Technologies , Burlington , ON ) supplemented with 10 % FBS ( Life Technologies ) without antibiotics at 37 °C in 5 % CO . 
Where indicated , the cells 2 were cultured with 200 U/ml IFN-g ( Genzyme , Cambridge , MA ) for 24 h before infection . 
Infection conditions
For immunoﬂuorescence studies and bacterial colony counts , 24-well plates were seeded with 2.5 3 105 RAW 264.7 cells per well . 
Bacteria were diluted in culture medium to give a nominal multiplicity of infection ( MOI ) 3 of ; 20 . 
Invasion was allowed to proceed for 10 min in a 37 °C , CO2 incubator . 
Cells were washed two times with PBS to remove extracellular bacteria and then incubated in DMEM plus 10 % FBS containing 50 g/ml gentamicin ( Sigma , St. Louis , MO ) to kill any remaining extra-m cellular bacteria and prevent reinfection . 
After 2 h , the gentamicin con ¬ 
3 Abbreviations used in this paper : MOI , multiplicity of infection ; MIP , macrophage inﬂammatory protein ; Hox , homeobox transcription factor ; DP-1 , DRTF polypep-tide-1 ; I-kB , inhibitory kB ; iNOS , inducible NO synthase . 
centration was lowered to 5 mg/ml . 
Colony counts and immunoﬂuorescence were subsequently performed in parallel to compare the variability in the actual number of intracellular bacteria per cell with the average number per cell for the population , as determined by colony counts . 
To determine invasion efﬁciency , samples of cells were washed twice with PBS to remove gentamicin and lysed with 1 % Triton X-100 / 0.1 % SDS in PBS at 2 h postinfection . 
Numbers of intracellular bacteria were calculated by colony counts . 
At various times postinfection , immunoﬂuorescence was performed as previously described ( 36 ) using a rabbit polyclonal anti-LPS Ab diluted 1:200 ( S. typhimurium O Ag group B factors 1 , 4 , 5 , and 12 ; Difco , Detroit , MI ) and Alexa 488-conjugated mouse anti-rabbit secondary Ab diluted 1:400 ( Molecular Probes , Eugene OR ) . 
Cells were counted within randomly selected ﬁelds . 
Consistently , macrophages were infected by an average of one to three bacteria per cell as assessed by standard plate counts and immunoﬂuorescence studies . 
RNA isolation 
RAW 264.7 macrophage cells were seeded at 5.6 3 106 cells in 20 ml media per 150 mm diameter tissue culture dishes and cultured overnight . 
RAW 264.7 macrophages were infected with S. typhimurium at an MOI of 20 or stimulated with 100 ng/ml S. typhimurium LPS ( Sigma ) for 4 h . 
After stimulation , the culture medium was removed for measurement of cytokine production . 
The cells were washed once with diethyl pyrocarbonate-treated PBS and scraped to detach the cells from the dish . 
RNA was then isolated using Trizol according to the manufacturer 's directions ( Life Technologies ) . 
The RNA pellet was resuspended in RNase-free water containing RNase inhibitor ( Ambion , Austin , TX ) . 
Contaminating genomic DNA was removed using DNaseI ( Clontech , Palo Alto , CA ) in the presence of 50 U RNase inhibitor for 1 h at 37 °C . 
The reaction was stopped by adding 1/10 volume 103 termination mix ( 0.1 M EDTA , pH 8.0 , 1 mg/ml glycogen ) and extracted twice with phenol : chloroform : isoamyl alcohol ( 25:24:1 ) and once with chloroform . 
The RNA was then precipitated with 2.5 volumes 100 % ethanol and 1/10 volume sodium acetate , pH 5.2 , resuspended in RNase-free water with RNase inhibitor , and stored at 270 °C in aliquots to minimize freeze-thaw cycles . 
Thirty micrograms of total RNA , as determined by OD260 reading , was routinely isolated from one 150-mm dish of cells . 
The quality of the RNA was assessed by gel electrophoresis and ethidium bromide staining . 
The absence of genomic contamination was conﬁrmed by using the isolated RNA as a template for PCR ampliﬁcation using b-actin-speciﬁc primers ( 59-GTCCCTGTATGCCTCTGGTC-39 and 59-GATGTCACGCACGATTTCC-39 ) in the absence of reverse transcriptase . 
The absence of an amplicon after 35 cycles was checked by agarose gel electrophoresis and ethidium bromide staining . 
Mouse cDNA expression arrays
Atlas mouse cDNA expression arrays I ( no. 7741-1 ; Clontech ) consist of a matched set of positively charged membranes containing duplicate spots of 588 mouse partial cDNAs . 
Information on the genes represented on these arrays and hybridization protocols can be found on the manufacturer 's website : www.clontech.com . 
Brieﬂy , 32P-radiolabeled ﬁrst-strand cDNA probes were prepared from 2 -- 5 mg of total RNA from each cell population using Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase and pooled 32 primers speciﬁc for the 588 genes . 
P-labeled cDNA probe was separated from unincorporated nucleotides using the provided ChromaSpin columns , and probe activity was measured using a scintillation counter . 
The arrays were prehybridized for 1 h with ExpressHyb containing 100 mg/ml heatdenatured herring sperm DNA ( Sigma ) to block nonspeciﬁc hybridization . 
The ﬁlters were then incubated with 1-5 3 106 cpm of denatured cDNA probes in 5 ml of hybridization solution in hybridization bottles . 
Hybrid-ization was performed overnight at 71 °C in a hybridization oven , and bottles were rotated at 5 rpm . 
The ﬁlters were then extensively washed at low-and high-stringency conditions in hybridization bottles at a rotation speed of 15 rpm , exposed to a phosphoimager screen ( Molecular Dynamics , Sunnyvale , CA ) for 3 -- 5 days at 4 °C , and the resulting hybridization signals measured using a PSI Phosphoimager ( Molecular Dynamics ) . 
Atlas Image 1.0 ( Clontech ) and Excel 5.0 ( Microsoft , Redmond , WA ) software were used to quantify and compare the hybridization signals . 
The intensities for each spot were corrected for background levels and normalized for differences in probe labeling using the average values for genes observed to vary little between our stimulation conditions : b-actin , ubiquitin , GAPDH , calcium binding protein CAB45 , and ribosomal protein S29 ( 37 ) . 
Spots with an intensity ,300 under all conditions , as calculated by Atlas Image , exhibited higher variability and a low signal-to-noise ratio and were therefore not included in the analysis . 
Genes included in all tables were selected by the following criteria : the mean hybridization intensity values for macrophage genes were altered by .2 - fold upon S. typhimurium infection ; the averaged data was representative of the individual data sets ; duplicate spots on the array gave similar hybridization signals ; and the speciﬁc hybridization signal was not confounded by background hybrid-ization . 
Intensity values of zero were replaced by the value of 20 to permit ratio calculation . 
Image analysis 
Northern blots
cDNA was prepared from total RNA puriﬁed from RAW 264.7 cells using oligo ( dT ) and SuperScript II reverse transcriptase ( Life Technologies ) . 
The following primer pairs were designed to amplify portions of the indicated macrophage cDNAs to produce templates for probe synthesis : DRFT polypep-tide-1 ( DP-1 ) , 59-TCCAATGGGTCTCAGTACAGC-39 , 59-TGTCATTGT CACTGGTGTGG-39 ; IL-1b , 59-TCCAGGATGAGGACATGAGC-39 , 59-CT TGTGCTCTGCTTGTGAGG-39 ; cyclin D1 , 59-CAGCTTAATGTGCC CTCTCC-39 , 59-GGTAATGCCATCATGGTTCC-39 ; tristetraprolin , 59-GGACTCGTCATTGCTGTGG-39 , 59-CAATGGCTTTGGCTATTTGC-39 ; CD14 , 59-CTGATCTCAGCCCTCTGTCC-39 , 59-CAGGAGGATGCAAAT GTTCC-39 ; GAPDH , 59-AGAACATCATCCCTGCATCC-39 , 59-CTGG GATGGAAATTGTGAGG-39 . 
Antisense cDNA probes were prepared by PCR using 50 ng of the appropriate PCR product template , the 39 oligo , and modiﬁed nucleotides to facilitate repeated stripping of blots ( Strip-EZ PCR ; Ambion ) . 
These single-stranded PCR products were column puriﬁed ( Qiagen , Mississauga , ON ) and labeled with biotin using psoralen-biotin ( Ambion ) and cross-linking with 365 nm UV light . 
Northern blots were performed with the NorthernMax-Gly kit ( Ambion ) which uses glyoxal/DMSO to denature the RNA as an alternative to formaldehyde . 
RNA was transferred to a positively charged membrane ( Ambion ) and cross-linked with long-wave UV light and baked at 80 °C for 30 min . 
Labeled probe ( 3 ng in 10 ml UltraHyb or ZipHyb ; Ambion ) was used for hybridization at 45 °C . 
The BrightStar nonisotopic detection kit ( Ambion ) was used for probe detection according to the manufacturer 's protocols . 
Northern blots were analyzed using an AlphaImager system ( Alpha Innotech , San Leandro , CA ) . 
Cytokine assays
The concentration of TNF-a , IL-1b , and macrophage inﬂammatory protein ( MIP ) -1 a in culture supernatantnts from RAW 264.7 cells was determined by ELISA ( R&D Systems , Minneapolis , MN ) . 
Results Establishment of array hybridization conditions
FIGURE 1 . 
Differential gene expression by macrophages upon S. typhi-murium infection or LPS stimulation as measured by gene arrays . 
RAW 264.7 cells were ( A ) unstimulated , ( B ) infected with S. typhimurium , or ( C ) stimulated with 100 ng/ml S. typhimurium LPS . 
Total RNA was isolated after 4 h and used to prepare a 32P-labeled ﬁrst-strand cDNA probe using reverse transcriptase and pooled primers speciﬁc for the 588 genes arrayed on the membranes . 
Probes were hybridized to gene arrays containing duplicate spots of partial cDNAs representing a wide range of genes , and the hybridization intensities were collected using a phosphoimager . 
The two pairs of cDNA spots identiﬁed by boxes correspond to MIP-1a and -1 b . 
The ﬁve circled pairs of cDNA spots identify the genes used for data normalization : ubiquitin , GAPDH , b-actin , Cab45 calcium binding protein , and ribosomal protein S29 ( left to right ) . 
These data are representative of two to three experiments . 
Gene array technology was used to examine differential gene expression in the RAW 264.7 murine macrophage cell line following S. typhimurium infection . 
The arrays chosen for this study contained 588 murine cDNAs encoding proteins with a wide range of functions and included several gene families whose role during macrophage responses to infection have not been characterized . 
Macrophages were infected with S. typhimurium SL1344 for 10 min , after which cells were washed and treated with gentamicin to kill any remaining extracellular bacteria and prevent reinfection . 
The short invasion time permitted a synchronous wave of bacterial invasion to induce a coordinated change in gene expression that could be measured 4 h postinfection . 
Total RNA was isolated from RAW 264.7 cells that were unstimulated or stimulated with virulent S. typhimurium or 100 ng/ml puriﬁed S. typhimurium LPS . 
Fig. 1 shows images of identical arrays hybridized with 32P-la-beled cDNA probes prepared from RAW 264.7 macrophages that were either left unstimulated , infected with S. typhimurium , or stimulated with puriﬁed S. typhimurium LPS . 
To permit comparison between multiple array experiments , the data sets were normalized to each other using the average expression level of ﬁve genes . 
Table I compares the hybridization intensities of these ﬁve genes and shows that their expression levels under different experimental conditions deviated by not more than 0.7 - to 1.4-fold , indicating valid data normalization . 
To determine the reproducibility of the gene arrays , we compared the hybridization intensities of two identical array membranes hybridized with probes synthesized from two separate RNA preparations of unstimulated RAW 264.7 cells . 
Less than 5 % of genes expressed by unstimulated cells varied by .2 - fold between the two hybridization experiments ( data not shown ) . 
Effect of S. typhimurium infection on RAW 264.7 macrophage gene expression Our application of gene array technology provided a cross-section of the diversity of genes whose expression is altered at a given time point after S. typhimurium infection . 
Due to the extensive amount of data accumulated from the gene array experiments , we have made the data sets for all 588 genes available on our web pages ( http://www.cmdr.ubc.ca/salmonellaarray ) . 
At 4 h postinfection with S. typhimurium , the expression levels for 40 of the 588 genes represented on the array were altered in RAW 264.7 macrophages by 4-fold or greater from their uninfected level ( Fig. 2 ) . 
When a cut-off of 2-fold induction or inhibition was applied to the data , 77 genes showed changes in expression . 
Fig. 2 shows the mean hybridization intensity values for macrophage genes , encoding a broad spectrum of proteins , that were induced by .4 - fold upon S. typhimurium infection . 
Many of these up-regulated genes encode effectors with well-characterized proinﬂammatory or direct anti-microbial properties . 
For example , inducible NO synthase ( iNOS ) , which encodes the enzyme responsible for producing the potent antibacterial molecule NO , was strongly induced upon S. typhi-murium infection ( 38 ) . 
Highly elevated expression levels were also observed for the chemokines MIP-1a , MIP-1b , ( 39 ) , and MIP-2a ( 40 ) , which selectively recruit other effector cells to infection sites ( 41 ) . 
The expression of IL-1b , which contributes to the proinﬂammatory and acute-phase responses , was also up-regulated ( 42 ) . 
S. typhimurium infection also elevated the expression of receptors that allow macrophages to communicate with other cells of the immune system . 
Expression of the gene encoding the receptor for the proinﬂammatory cytokine TNF-a was up-regulated , as was CD40 . 
CD40 binds to a ligand on T lymphocytes , and this interaction induces the production of many inﬂammatory mediators , primes T cells ( 43 ) , and augments survival of mice infected with Salmonella dublin ( 44 ) . 
A subset of the induced genes shown in Fig. 2 may serve to control or inhibit the inﬂammatory response . 
Tristetraprolin was highly induced upon S. typhimurium infection and can decrease TNF-a synthesis by decreasing mRNA stability ( 45 ) . 
Elevated transcription of the inhibitory kB ( I-kB ) a and b inhibitory subunits of NF-kB was also observed , and these proteins are known to down-regulate the transcriptional program initiated by the translocation of NF-kB to the nucleus ( 46 ) . 
Elevated expression of the antiinﬂammatory cytokines TGF-b1 and - b2 was also observed . 
TGF-b can have potent effects on macrophage activities , and administration of recombinant TGF-b has been shown to protect mice from a lethal dose of S. typhimurium ( 47 ) . 
Elevated mRNA levels for signaling molecules that are involved in cell death or the response to IFN-g were also observed . 
These include the apoptosis-associated genes ICE protease ( caspase 1 ) , TNF receptor 1 , Fas , TDAG51 , and TRAIL , and the IFN-g-induced IFN regulatory factor 1 ( IRF-1 ) . 
Some of the S. typhimurium-up-regu-lated genes also encode proteins involved in macrophage migration . 
For example , ICAM-1 is required for vascular extravasation during migration to sites of infection , and urokinase plasminogen activator receptor participates in extracellular matrix remodeling ( 48 ) . 
Dystroglycan 1 promotes extracellular matrix formation , and its transcriptional down-regulation ( Fig. 3 ) may cooperate with the up-regulated genes encoding various proteases to remodel the extracellular matrix and promote tissue inﬁltration by macrophages ( 49 , 50 ) . 
The pattern of altered gene expression caused by S. typhimurium infection is reminiscent of the antiproliferative and prodifferentiating transcriptional program that occurs during myeloid development . 
A number of genes with well-characterized roles in macro-phage differentiation were up-regulated by S. typhimurium infection ( Fig. 2 ) . 
For example , leukemia inhibitory factor ( LIF ) was up-regulated . 
LIF is secreted by macrophages in response to LPS and promotes myeloid differentiation ( 51 ) . 
A number of transcription factors were also regulated by S. typhimurium infection . 
Expression of Egr-1 , NF-E2 , IRF-1 , and c-rel was up-regulated , while expression of Ski , B-myb , Fli-1 , and c-Fes was down-reg-ulated by .2 - fold ( Fig. 3 ) . 
Egr-1 controls both monocyte development and appears necessary for maintenance of macrophage differentiation , as the expression of many cytokines and receptors important during infection are regulated by Egr-1 activity ( 52 ) . 
B-myb is a negative regulator of macrophage terminal differentiation , and its down-regulation by bacterial products promotes mac-rophage development . 
These transcription factors all regulate mac-rophage differentiation , and their coordinated expression in response to bacterial products may serve to promote development of the macrophage 's antibacterial abilities ( 53 , 54 ) . 
Expression of these transcription factors during macrophage maturation is usually coupled with an inhibition of cell proliferation . 
The expression level of many genes controlling cell cycle G1 to S phase transition were down-regulated . 
Modest decreases in the mRNA levels of cyclin D1 and its partner cyclin-dependent kinase ( cdk ) 4 were measured . 
This kinase complex phosphorylates the retinoblastoma gene product , causing it to dissociate from the DP-1 : E2F heterodimer , which then translocates to the nucleus and initiates cell cycle progression . 
The array results also revealed down-regulation of DP-1 and cyclin E , as well as up-regulated expression of various retinoblastoma-related genes ( data not shown ) , all known to block entry into S phase ( 55 ) . 
Table I. Hybridization intensities of genes used for data normalizationa 
Average Intensity for Duplicate Array Spots Ratio Relative to Unstimulated Cells 
Gene Unstimulated S. typhimurium LPS S. typhimurium LPS 
Ubiquitin GAPDH 
15698 5102 9782 1446 12582 
18217 4412 11934 1305 10824 
12323 6145 11644 1263 11916 
13614 5234 14163 1382 11076 
16011 4553 11589 1185 11924 
12923 6264 11346 1150 11348 
18977 4670 12687 1065 10860 
1.2 0.9 1.2 0.9 0.9 
0.8 1.2 1.2 0.9 0.9 
0.9 1.0 1.4 1.0 0.9 
1.0 0.9 1.2 0.8 0.9 
0.8 1.2 1.2 0.8 0.9 
1.2 0.9 1.3 0.7 0.9 
b-actin Cab45 Ribosomal S29 
a The average hybridization signals for duplicate cDNA spots of ubiquitin , GAPDH , b-actin , Cab45 calcium binding protein , and ribosomal protein S29 were calculated and corrected for background . 
The values for these ﬁve genes were normalized to each other to account for differences in probe labeling efﬁciency between experiments . 
Table 1 contains the mean hybridization intensities of these ﬁve genes after normalization for the eight hybridization experiments summarized in Figs. 2 and 3 . 
The appropriate normalization coefﬁcient was then used to normalize the entire data sets to make possible direct comparison between them . 
FIGURE 2 . 
A , RAW 264.7 macrophage gene expression induced by S. typhimurium and LPS . 
Gene arrays were hybridized using cDNA probes prepared from unstimulated RAW 264.7 cells or from cells 4 h after S. typhimurium infection or S. typhimurium LPS stimulation . 
Listed are genes whose mRNA levels were raised by at least 4-fold . 
The mean hybridization signal for each gene was calculated from two to three data sets obtained from hybridization experiments using probes prepared from independent batches of RNA . 
The fold increase in hybridization signal upon S. typhi-murium infection or LPS stimulation was calculated relative to the value for unstimulated cells . 
B , Graphical representation of selected induced genes . 
A graphical representation of the mean hybridization signals for a subset of induced genes in unstimulated cells ( f ) and following bacterial infection ( M ) or LPS stimulation ( o ) is shown . 
Error bars represent the SD from the mean of three intensity values for infected and LPS-stimulated cells and the range of two intensity values for unstimulated cells . 
Due to the extensive amount of data accumulated from the gene array experiments , we have made the complete data sets for all 588 genes available on our web pages ( http://www.cmdr.ubc . 
ca/salmonellaarray ) . 
FIGURE 3 . 
A , RAW 264.7 macrophage gene expression inhibited by S. typhi-murium and LPS . 
The mean hybridization intensity values for RAW 264.7 macro-phage mRNA levels that were repressed by at least 2-fold after S. typhimurium infection or LPS stimulation for 4 h are shown . 
The average hybridization intensities were calculated from two to three independent data sets obtained from hybridization experiments using probes prepared from independent batches of RNA . 
B , Graphical representation of selected repressed genes . 
A graphical representation of the mean hybridization signals and SD for a subset of repressed genes in unstimulated cells ( f ) and following bacterial infection ( M ) or LPS stimulation ( o ) is shown . 
Error bars represent the SD from the mean of three intensity values for infected and LPS-stim-ulated cells and the range of two intensity values for unstimulated cells . 
Due to the extensive amount of data accumulated from the gene array experiments , we have made the data sets for all 588 genes available on our web pages ( http://www.cmdr.ubc.ca/ salmonellaarray ) . 
a Table II lists genes differentially expressed due to prior activation with IFN-g by RAW 264.7 macrophages 4 h following S. typhimurium infection . 
The mean h intensities were calculated from two array hybridization experiments using RNA samples from IFN-g-activated RAW 264.7 cells and compared to the hybridizatio obtained from cells not primed with IFN-g . 
Ratios of gene expression for uninfected and infected cells were calculated by dividing the hybridization intensity for IF cells by the intensity for unprimed cells . 
ybridization n intensities N-g-primed 
Effect of IFN-g activation on gene expression by infected macrophages IFN-g primes macrophages for enhanced microbicidal responses to bacterial infection . 
The established importance of IFN-g production during S. typhimurium infection invites a molecular examination of how the macrophage 's gene expression proﬁle following S. typhimurium infection is affected by prior IFN-g activation . 
To this end , gene arrays were hybridized with cDNA probes prepared from uninfected and S. typhimurium-infected RAW 264.7 macrophages , with or without prior IFN-g activation . 
Table 2 presents genes that were differentially expressed by IFN-g-activated and unactivated macrophages 4 h after S. typhimurium infection . 
We found that IFN-g treatment altered the expression of a number of genes and , importantly , that it modulated the ability of S. typhimurium to alter macrophage gene expression . 
IFN-g often up-regulated gene expression in uninfected cells , such as BST-1 , MIG monokine , and MIP-1a . 
For some genes , this expression level was further enhanced by S. typhimurium infection . 
Examples include iNOS , I-kBb , NF-kB p65 , JunB , JunD , TDAG51 , tristet-raprolin , and TNF-a . 
For other genes , such as MIG , IFN-g upregulated their expression but bacterial products did not signiﬁcantly increase expression levels above the IFN-g-stimulated level . 
Prior IFN-g stimulation resulted in gene expression upon infection , such as the transcription factors Cdx2 and Brn3 .2 , which was not observed at the same time point in infected cells not primed by IFN-g . 
For other genes , IFN-g treatment up-regulated mRNA levels in uninfected cells , which was repressed following S. typhimurium infection . 
The IFN-inducible protein 1 is an example of this pattern of gene expression that may provide negative feedback . 
The most striking trend was an increase in the steady-state mRNA levels encoding transcription factors such as tristetraprolin , three members of the jun family , Fos B , I-kBa and I-kBb , C-EBP , Stat 5a , and elk-1 . 
Of note was an induction in the expression of the homeobox ( Hox ) family of transcription factors . 
Expression of the Hox-4 .2 , caudal-type homeobox 2 , and Brn 3.2 POU transcription factors was up-regulated by S. typhimurium infection of IFN-g-treated macrophages to a much greater extent than in unprimed macrophages . 
Homeobox genes play critical roles during development , and the homeobox genes Hox-B3 , Hox-B4 , and Hox-B7 have been implicated in orchestrating various stages of myeloid differentiation ( 53 , 56 ) . 
This is the ﬁrst data , to our knowledge , suggesting that other homeobox genes may play a role in macro-phage responses stimulated by bacterial products . 
Hybridization Intensity 
2IFN 1IFN Grid Uninfected Infected 
Accession No . 
Position Uninfected Infected Uninfected Infected 1IFN/2IFN 1IFN/2IFN Protein/Gene 
X12531 M57422 U19799 U44088 M34815 U09419 M87039 J05205 D31788 M61909 J03236 X57796 M60778 D17571 X52264 M86671 X67083 J03770 S69336 M37897 U19119 M20157 S68377 M26391 X87257 X61800 S74520 X72310 U17698 L12120 X14897 J04103 M37163 
F3e 
489 20 
10124 1475 575 302 56 167 698 231 20 20 171 265 107 167 258 167 25 166 240 323 1141 1372 59 106 176 57 21 1093 215 106 77 75 29 
3637 1262 1622 970 2374 1394 733 621 1598 659 273 654 786 392 537 641 245 20 399 431 876 230 20 267 302 21 20 534 71 117 263 106 20 
10454 3699 3155 2410 1885 1804 1705 1362 1219 1125 1055 1049 1002 967 808 741 702 599 568 546 534 495 465 444 433 425 367 340 338 323 312 278 267 
7.4 63 11 49 119 70 37 31 80 33 14 5.4 39 2.1 27 32 12 1.0 1.8 2.5 3.2 11 1.0 13 2.5 1.1 1.0 0.3 3.5 5.9 13 5.3 1.0 
1.0 2.5 5.5 8.0 33 11 2.4 5.9 61 56 6.2 4.0 9.3 5.8 3.1 4.4 28 3.6 2.4 1.7 0.5 0.4 7.8 4.2 2.5 7.5 18 0.3 1.6 3.1 4.1 3.7 9.1 
MIP-1 a Tristetraprolin 
B4k B3n C5a F1m D6g C3m A3g B2h B4a A3f C5b B3e C4a E7i F4n C3a D4e B3b F4l D4k D2i D1h A1m A3a D1k D1m D2g D1a E3a A3c D3b D1l 
143 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 121 20 183 20 20 20 20 223 170 272 20 20 20 123 20 20 1709 20 20 20 20 20 
I-kBb TDAG51 MIG RIP 15 iNOS jun-D BST-1 NF-kB p65 Jun-B TNF 55 LFA1-a NADPH-cytochrome P450 ICAM-1 IL-12 ( p40 ) b-chain Chop10 Hox-4 .2 IFN-g receptor 2 IL-10 IFN-inducible protein 1 Egr-1 Brn-3 .2 Rb ; pp105 Elk-1 C/EBP Cdx2 DP-1 Ablphilin-1 IL-10 receptor Fos-B Ets-2 Cdx1 
a Table II lists genes differentially expressed due to prior activation with IFN-g by RAW 264.7 macrophages 4 h following S. typhimurium infection . 
The mean h intensities were calculated from two array hybridization experiments using RNA samples from IFN-g-activated RAW 264.7 cells and compared to the hybridizatio obtained from cells not primed with IFN-g . 
Ratios of gene expression for uninfected and infected cells were calculated by dividing the hybridization intensity for IF cells by the intensity for unprimed cells . 
ybridization n intensities N-g-primed 
Contribution of LPS signaling to S. typhimurium-induced changes in gene expression LPS is a potent inducer of macrophage inﬂammatory functions ( 13 , 17 ) . 
Because S. typhimurium is a Gram-negative bacteria with an outer membrane rich in LPS , our hypothesis was that many of the effects of S. typhimurium on macrophage gene expression are due to its LPS . 
Gene arrays were used to identify the relative contribution of the bacterial component , LPS , to the overall pattern of macrophage gene expression observed during S. typhimurium infection . 
This analysis revealed that the gene expression proﬁles overlapped considerably ( Figs. 2 and 3 ) . 
In most cases , 100 ng/ml LPS caused equivalent or greater increases in steady-state mRNA levels than S. typhimurium infection . 
The 100 ng/ml dose of puriﬁed LPS used was probably greater than the amount of LPS that the macrophages encountered during a 10-min invasion by S. typhi-murium . 
Therefore , of special interest are genes , such as tristetraprolin , that this semiquantitative technique suggests are preferentially induced or repressed by Salmonella invasion in comparison to LPS stimulation . 
Conﬁrmation of array data using Northern blots and ELISAs
Despite its reproducibility , gene array analysis is only semiquantitative . 
Therefore , Northern blots were used to conﬁrm and more accurately measure the regulation of genes identiﬁed in our gene array analysis to be regulated by S. typhimurium infection or LPS stimulation . 
mRNA levels for both CD14 , a receptor for LPS , and IL-1b , a proinﬂammatory cytokine , were up-regulated , while cyclin D1 levels were decreased in macrophages by S. typhi-murium and puriﬁed LPS from Northern blot analysis , conﬁrming previously published data ( data not shown ) . 
Northern blots were also used to conﬁrm the induction or repression of candidate genes identiﬁed using array technology where there was little precedence in the literature . 
We analyzed mRNA levels of DP-1 and tristet-raprolin relative to GAPDH in RAW 264.7 macrophages at 1 , 4 , and 6 h following S. typhimurium infection or LPS stimulation . 
DP-1 binds to members of the E2F gene family to form a heterodimeric transcription factor that can regulate cell cycle progression ( 57 , 58 ) . 
Expression of DP-1 is necessary for progression from G1 to S phase , as shown by studies with dominant negative mutants ( 59 ) . 
To date , two DP genes and ﬁve E2F genes have been identiﬁed , and heterodimer subunit composition determines spec-iﬁcity for different E2F DNA binding sites ( 60 ) . 
Therefore , regulated expression of DP-1 may coordinate expression of a subset of genes involved in entry into S phase . 
According to the two array hybridization results , both S. typhimurium and LPS stimulation decreased DP-1 expression by 40 % in unprimed macrophages . 
We conﬁrmed this data by Northern blot analysis , in that DP-1 expression decreased at 6 h following infection or LPS stimulation ( Fig. 4A ) . 
To our knowledge , this is the ﬁrst report of repressed DP-1 mRNA levels in macrophages during bacterial infection . 
An important ﬁnding from this Northern blot analyses is that a decrease in macrophage gene expression as small as 40 % can be detected by array hybridization and conﬁrmed and quantiﬁed by Northern blot analysis . 
The expression of tristetraprolin was greatly up-regulated by both Salmonella infection and LPS , according to the array data sets . 
Tristetraprolin , encoded by the gene zfp-36 , has been hypothesized to be a transcription factor due to its zinc ﬁnger motif and its ability to translocate to the nucleus ( 61 ) . 
Tristetraprolin regulates mRNA stability as studies with knockout mice show that tristetraprolin lowers TNF-a protein levels by binding to the AU-rich elements in TNF-a mRNA and destabilizing it ( 62 ) . 
Tristet-raprolin is encoded by an early response gene that is rapidly induced by mitogens ( 63 ) and LPS ( 45 ) . 
In Northern blot experiments , we found that expression of tristetraprolin was increased as early as 1 h poststimulation by virulent S. typhimurium or by LPS ( data not shown ) and then decreased to a lower level at 4 and 6 h ( Fig. 4B ) . 
The apparent increase in tristetraprolin mRNA levels was smaller when quantiﬁed by Northern blot analysis compared with the array data , suggesting that the array technique accurately detects trends in altered gene expression but can overestimate ratios . 
This could be explained by the inability of the semiquantitative array technique to accurately quantify low levels of gene expression , for example in unstimulated cells . 
Quantitation of the Northern blotting results revealed that macrophages infected by S. typhimurium exhibited a higher level of tristetraprolin mRNA compared with macrophages stimulated by 100 ng/ml LPS . 
This conﬁrmed the array data , which suggested that infection by one to three bacteria per macrophage induced a 30 % higher level of tristetraprolin mRNA than following stimulation by LPS . 
To conﬁrm that changes in mRNA levels detected by the array hybridizations translated into similar changes in protein abundance for a subset of genes , growth media was collected from the cells used for RNA isolation and tested for proinﬂammatory cytokine levels by ELISA . 
In culture supernatants from cells infected with or stimulated with LPS , levels of MIP-1 ( both S. typhimurium a conditions resulted in 6.3 -- 8.8 ng/ml ) and TNF - ( infection , 1.3 -- 2 a ng/ml ; LPS , 2.8 -- 3.4 ng/ml ) were elevated at 4 h , while levels of IL-1b were elevated at 24 h ( 0.3 -- 0.5 ng/ml ) when compared with unstimulated cells . 
For each ELISA , proinﬂammatory cytokine concentrations in culture supernatants of cells stimulated by S. typhimurium or LPS were similar , supporting our array data . 
By array analysis , iNOS expression was induced by S. typhimurium infection and LPS stimulation . 
Elevated levels of nitrate in the culture supernatants were detected at 24 h ( data not shown ) , indicating increased iNOS activity and conﬁrming that elevated iNOS expression translated into increased NO production . 
FIGURE 4 . 
Conﬁrmation and quantiﬁcation of genes differentially expressed upon S. typhimurium infection and LPS stimulation using Northern blots . 
RAW 264.7 cells were infected with S. typhimurium at an MOI of 20:1 or stimulated with 100 ng/ml S. typhimurium LPS and compared with unstimulated cells . 
Total RNA was isolated from macrophages after 4 and 6 h. RNA was separated by denaturing gel electrophoresis , immobilized on a positively charged membrane , and probed sequentially with biotinylated single-stranded cDNA probes speciﬁc for ( A ) DP-1 , ( B ) tristetraprolin , and ( C ) GAPDH . 
The hybridization intensities were quantiﬁed using a densitometer and normalized to GAPDH expression . 
Graphs depict the fold change subsequent to bacterial infection ( o ) or LPS stimulation ( M ) relative to unstimulated cells ( f ) at each time point for the Northern blot shown . 
These data conﬁrm results from three separate array hybridizations and are representative of at least two Northern blot experiments . 
Discussion
rapid identiﬁcation of genes previously not known to be involved in the host response to pathogens . 
In this study , we identiﬁed genes that have never been directly implicated in macrophage responses to S. typhimurium infection and identiﬁed novel gene targets of LPS signaling . 
These include dystroglycan , which is involved in extracellular matrix formation , and DP-1 , which regulates cell cycle progression . 
Second , gene arrays permit comparison of expression proﬁles obtained from multiple stages of infection , from stimulation with puriﬁed microbial products , or from infection with bacterial virulence factor mutants . 
Our comparison of macrophage gene expression altered by bacterial infection to stimulation with puriﬁed LPS suggests that LPS serves a principal role in altering host gene expression during S. typhimurium infection . 
Third , gene arrays measure changes in individual genes in the context of how the expression of other members of the gene family , their receptors , ligands , or transcriptional activators are altered . 
This allows a more comprehensive understanding of host responses to bacterial infection by identifying patterns of gene expression that would not be evident from studying each gene in isolation . 
Indeed , this approach enabled us to detect the induction of families of transcription factors in IFN-g-activated macrophages following S. typhi-murium infection . 
We were able to identify novel macrophage gene targets of IFN-g activation or S. typhimurium infection by looking at ,600 genes . 
The genes presented in this study likely underestimate the total number of affected genes due to limitations of accurately quantifying very low levels of gene expression . 
This suggests that gene array ﬁlters , used in this study , can complement the use of gene chip technology , which can analyze the expression of thousands of genes , because different cross-sections of the genome can be studied in each case . 
The use of commercially available ﬁlterbased gene arrays is an accessible approach to generate testable hypotheses of how hosts respond to pathogens . 
These arrays have the advantage of containing characterized genes for which reagents such as Abs , mutant cell lines , and knockout mice may be available for hypothesis testing . 
An even more comprehensive view of host response could be obtained by extending this approach to using gene microarrays incorporating thousands of genes . 
For this to be successful , improved bioinformatics resources are needed as well as a conceptual shift in the way we analyze and publish large amounts of data . 
The ﬁndings of many studies similarly rest on our assumption that changes in steady-state mRNA levels often correlate with meaningful changes in protein levels . 
While increased protein levels have been measured for many of the genes found to be differentially expressed in this study , others are bound to be regulated at the level of protein synthesis , posttranslational modiﬁcation , or intracellular localization . 
This also highlights the need for high-throughput strategies to conﬁrm changes in genes of interest at the level of transcription , translation , and protein localization to pursue the biological relevance of array data . 
Our gene array results suggest that the macrophage 's transcriptional program undergoes a massive overhaul during bacterial infection and highlight the myriad of ways in which macrophages attempt to control and clear Salmonella infection . 
The majority of differentially expressed genes were up-regulated upon S. typhi-murium infection , and several of these are known to play well-characterized roles during bacterial infection . 
In general , we observed a strong proinﬂammatory response that may be tempered by up-regulated expression of TGF-b , IL-10 , and tristetraprolin , all of which have demonstrated antiinﬂammatory properties . 
This suggests that there may be a balance between proinﬂammatory responses and negative feedback regulation during S. typhimurium infection ( 42 ) . 
Stimulation by LPS enhances the macrophage 's ability to interact with other cells through the coordinated expression of various receptors , such as CD40 and ICAM-1 ( 44 ) . 
Extracellular matrix remodeling , through alterations in the expression of various proteases , protease inhibitors , and dystroglycan may promote macrophage entry into infected tissues ( 48 ) . 
Differentially expressed genes identiﬁed using the arrays were not limited to genes with characterized proinﬂammatory or antibacterial properties , because S. typhimurium had numerous effects on the cell cycle regulator and transcription factor gene families within macro-phages . 
With myeloid cells , LPS has anti-mitotic effects by downregulating the expression of cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases and by inﬂuencing levels of positive and negative transcriptional activators ( 55 ) . 
Northern blots for cyclin D1 and the transcription factor DP-1 revealed that the expression of both are decreased to an equivalent extent by LPS and S. typhimurium . 
This suggests that Salmonella infection may affect the cell cycle via LPS signaling . 
Our data supports a reprioritizing of host gene expression away from normal physiology toward establishing an antibacterial state . 
While S. typhimurium initially invade naive unactivated murine macrophages in vivo , macrophages are more likely to be stimulated by IFN-g during later stages of S. typhimurium infection ( 7 ) . 
IFN-g-activated macrophages display enhanced microbicidal activities upon bacterial infection , due to changes in the expression of genes such as iNOS and MIP chemokines ( 64 ) . 
However , the spectrum of host responses affected by IFN-g priming is not fully understood at the molecular level . 
We analyzed the expression patterns of hundreds of genes to gain a more comprehensive understanding of how priming by IFN-g alters macrophage gene expression , and hence responses , to S. typhimurium infection . 
We identiﬁed a variety of gene expression patterns in IFN-g-primed RAW 264.7 macrophages , which included up-regulated gene expression in uninfected cells , synergistic effects between IFN-g and S. typhimurium infection , and elevated expression of genes following infection of IFN-g-primed cells that was not seen following infection of unprimed cells . 
IFN-g signaling has been shown to increase the amount of NF-kB in the macrophage cytoplasm that , upon LPS stimulation , translocates to the nucleus more rapidly and effectively than without prior priming by IFN-g ( 64 , 65 ) . 
This model of priming by IFN-g may explain the differential response to S. typhimurium mediated by IFN-g , by altering the kinetics of gene activation , so that genes are elevated at our 4 h window . 
Alternatively , IFN-g may supply a necessary ﬁrst signal so that a second stimulus provided by the bacteria triggers gene expression , which is not possible in unactivated cells . 
Either mechanism could make IFN-g-primed macrophages more sensitive to stimulation by bacterial products and permit a more rapid and effective antimicrobial response against invading S. typhimurium . 
To our knowledge , this is the ﬁrst report of the application of gene arrays to the study of macrophage biology by proﬁling how RAW 264.7 macrophages respond to various stimuli , such as IFN-g and LPS . 
Maturation of myeloid cells into terminally differentiated macrophages involves an arrest in proliferation and the differential expression of many transcription factors ( 54 ) , some of which were identiﬁed using the arrays . 
Both LPS and IFN-g exert anti-mitotic effects while promoting development of the antimicrobial properties of myeloid cells . 
Many of the cell cycle regulatory and transcription factor genes expressed by RAW 264.7 cells in response to LPS stimulation have previously been reported using primary macrophages ( 18 , 45 , 46 , 53 , 66 -- 70 ) . 
This suggests that RAW 264.7 cells may provide an adequate model for identifying genes involved in macrophage responses to infection , which can then be further characterized using primary macrophages . 
The most striking class of gene induction in IFN-g-activated cells 4 h after S. typhimurium infection was a group of .15 transcription factors . 
In infected unactivated cells , many of these transcriptional activators , namely of the homeodomain class , were not induced above our detection level . 
Hox transcription factors play crucial roles during developmental patterning ( 71 ) . 
A previous report has connected the processes of developmental patterning and macro-phage differentiation by implicating the expression of the Hox transcription factor Hox-2 .4 ( Hox-B8 ) in the terminal differentiation of a hemopoietic cell line along the macrophage lineage ( 56 ) . 
This differentiation required expression of Egr-1 , which was upregulated upon infection of IFN-g-activated RAW 264.7 macro-phages in this study . 
Because IFN-g activation of macrophages results in differentiation of monocytes into macrophages , it is possible that expression of Hox transcription factors upon infection of RAW 264.7 macrophages , identiﬁed in this study , may promote further maturation of the cell 's antibacterial phenotype . 
Alternatively , these transcription factors may serve an as yet uncharacterized role during macrophage response to S. typhimurium infection We hypothesized that LPS , a structural component of all Gramnegative bacteria and the most well-characterized modulin , should play a principal role in stimulating the early innate response of macrophages to bacterial infection . 
To test this hypothesis , we compared changes in host gene expression caused by virulent S. typhimurium and puriﬁed S. typhimurium LPS to investigate the relative contribution of this virulence factor . 
LPS exerts its effects through its lipid A moiety , which is buried in the cell wall of live bacteria . 
During our infection model , cells would be stimulated by the lipid A of LPS shed by live bacteria , extracellular bacteria killed by antibiotics , or intracellular bacteria killed by macro-phages . 
There was a remarkable degree of overlap between genes induced by virulent S. typhimurium and puriﬁed S. typhimurium LPS . 
The 100-ng/ml dose of LPS was likely much higher than the amount of free LPS that stimulated the cells during infection and caused equivalent or higher alterations in gene expression when compared with bacterial infection . 
The overlap in the macrophage expression data following stimulation with virulent S. typhimurium or puriﬁed S. typhimurium LPS suggests that there is redundancy in host response to bacteria . 
Gene expression regulated by LPS stimulation has also been shown to be altered by other bacterial components . 
The ability of both S. typhimurium LPS and ﬂagellar proteins to trigger TNF-a and IL-1b release by macrophages ( 20 , 22 ) supports the concept that different bacterial inputs can initiate a conserved program of macrophage responses . 
The remarkable overlap in macrophage gene expression induced by S. typhimurium or puriﬁed S. typhimurium LPS suggests that Salmonella speciﬁcally affects a relatively small subset of macro-phage processes to secure their survival rather than completely dampening the inﬂammatory response . 
A number of host proteins and signaling cascades have been identiﬁed that are modiﬁed by speciﬁc bacterial virulence effectors . 
For example , the S. typhi-murium virulence factor SopE up-regulates IL-8 production by epithelial cells ( 25 ) , and SipB binds and activates caspase 1 ( ICE ) protease to promote macrophage apoptosis ( 24 ) . 
The majority of these studies have used epithelial cells and have measured how S. typhimurium invasion and virulence factor expression speciﬁcally alter host protein abundance or activity . 
Our results in macro-phages , at the level of altered gene expression , invites a comparative study in epithelial cells to identify similarities and differences in gene expression proﬁles between these two infection models . 
Because S. typhimurium resides within macrophages to cause systemic disease , bacterial factors independent of LPS likely specifically modulate macrophage phenotype at the levels of gene expression , protein abundance , and protein activity to secure this intracellular niche . 
We identiﬁed some genes induced to a higher extent by S. typhimurium infection compared with LPS stimulation and have conﬁrmed this higher level of expression for tristetra-prolin . 
While the differential increase in expression was small , it may be signiﬁcant that another bacterial factor can produce a higher induction in gene expression compared with a relatively large dose of LPS . 
This raises the intriguing possibility that another virulence factor up-regulates tristetraprolin mRNA levels in macrophages . 
Our ability to conﬁrm array data for differential tristetraprolin expression suggests that other differentially expressed genes identiﬁed by array hybridization may be altered by additional bacterial virulence factors acting synergistically or antagonistically with the effects of LPS . 
Experiments using killed bacteria or macrophages from LPS-hyporesponsive mice will more accurately quantify the contribution of LPS-independent factors in altering host gene expression . 
We are presently employing more quantitative techniques to determine whether macrophage genes shown in this study as being differentially expressed to a greater extent upon S. typhimurium infection than by 100 ng/ml LPS , such as tristetraprolin , are speciﬁcally responding to an active bacterial process . 
Array technology is also ideally suited to the study of host gene expression in response to characterized Salmonella mutants to address the contribution of other speciﬁc bacterial virulence factors in modulating host gene expression . 
This application of array technology will provide insight into how pathogenic bacteria use some of their many virulence effectors to speciﬁcally alter host cell biology and secure their niche . 
Array technology is highly applicable to studying numerous hostpathogen interactions . 
Comparison of array data from host cells infected with a variety of pathogenic bacteria will likely reveal how speciﬁc virulence factors trigger a unique pattern of host gene expression in response to the particular pathogen . 
Comparison of these data sets with those obtained from LPS and other structural components will likely reveal an overall conserved host gene expression proﬁle that serves as a common signature of infection . 
Gene array technology promises to provide much-needed insight into host cell gene expression during infection and to broaden our understanding of host-pathogen interactions . 
Note added in proof . 
Cohen et al. ( 72 ) recently proﬁled gene expression changes in human THP-1 cells following Listeria monocytogenes infection using gene arrays . 
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Fiona S. Brinkman for creating the web site for the array data and members of the Finlay laboratory for insightful discussions and critical readings of the manuscript . 
References 
1 . 
Pang , T. , Z. A. Bhutta , B. B. Finlay , and M. Altwegg . 
1995 . 
Typhoid fever and other salmonellosis : a continuing challenge . 
Trends Microbiol . 
3:253 . 
2 . 
Finlay , B. B. , and S. Falkow . 
1997 . 
Common themes in microbial pathogenicity revisited . 
Microbiol . 
Mol . 
Biol . 
Rev. 61:136 . 
3 . 
Jones , B. D. , and S. Falkow . 
1996 . 
Salmonellosis : host immune responses and bacterial virulence determinants . 
Annu . 
Rev. Immunol . 
14:533 . 
4 . 
Richter-Dahlfors , A. , A. M. J. Buchan , and B. B. Finlay . 
1997 . 
Murine salmo-nellosis studied by confocal microscopy : Salmonella typhimurium resides intracellularly inside macrophages and exerts a cytotoxic effect on phagocytes in vivo . 
J. Exp . 
Med . 
186:569 . 
5 . 
Kaufmann , S. H. 1993 . 
Immunity to intracellular bacteria . 
Annu . 
Rev. Immunol . 
11:129 . 
6 . 
Muotiala , A. , and P. H. Makela . 
1990 . 
The role of IFN-g in murine Salmonella typhimurium infection . 
Microb . 
Pathog . 
8:135 . 
7 . 
Nauciel , C. , and F. Espinasse-Maes . 
1992 . 
Role of g interferon and tumor ne-crosis factor a in resistance to Salmonella typhimurium infection . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
60:450 . 
8 . 
VanCott , J. L. , S. N. Chatﬁeld , M. Roberts , D. M. Hone , E. L. Hohmann , D. W. Pascual , M. Yamamoto , H. Kiyono , and J. R. McGhee . 
1998 . 
Regulation of host immune responses by modiﬁcation of Salmonella virulence genes . 
Nat . 
Med . 
4:1247 . 
9 . 
Der , S. D. , A. Zhou , B. R. Williams , and R. H. Silverman . 
1998 . 
Identiﬁcation of genes differentially regulated by interferon a , b , or g using oligonucleotide arrays . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 95:15623 . 
10 . 
Paulnock , D. 1994 . 
The molecular biology of macrophage activation . 
In Mac-rophage-Pathogen Interactions , Vol . 
60 . 
B. Zwilling and T. Eisenstein , eds . 
Marcel Dekker , New York , p. 47 . 
11 . 
Billiau , A. 1996 . 
Interferon-g : biology and role in pathogenesis . 
Adv. Immunol . 
62:61 . 
12 . 
Boehm , U. , T. Klamp , M. Groot , and J. C. Howard . 
1997 . 
Cellular responses to interferon-g . 
Annu . 
Rev. Immunol . 
15:749 . 
13 . 
Henderson , B. , S. Poole , and M. Wilson . 
1996 . 
Bacterial modulins : a novel class of virulence factors which cause host tissue pathology by inducing cytokine synthesis . 
Microbiol . 
Rev. 60:316 . 
14 . 
Suffredini , A. F. , G. Fantuzzi , R. Badolato , J. J. Oppenheim , and N. P. O'Grady . 
1999 . 
New insights into the biology of the acute phase response . 
J. Clin . 
Immu-nol . 
19:203 . 
15 . 
Wilson , M. , R. Seymour , and B. Henderson . 
1998 . 
Bacterial perturbation of cytokine networks . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
66:2401 . 
16 . 
Ulevitch , R. J. , and P. S. Tobias . 
1995 . 
Receptor-dependent mechanisms of cell stimulation by bacterial endotoxin . 
Annu . 
Rev. Immunol . 
13:437 . 
17 . 
Ulevitch , R. J. , and P. S. Tobias . 
1999 . 
Recognition of gram-negative bacteria and endotoxin by the innate immune system . 
Curr . 
Opin . 
Immunol . 
11:19 . 
18 . 
Sweet , M. J. , and D. A. Hume . 
1996 . 
Endotoxin signal transduction in macro-phages . 
J. Leukocyte Biol . 
60:8 . 
19 . 
Diamond , G. , J. P. Russell , and C. L. Bevins . 
1996 . 
Inducible expression of an antibiotic peptide gene in lipopolysaccharide-challenged tracheal epithelial cells . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 93:5156 . 
20 . 
Ciacci-Woolwine , F. , P. F. McDermott , and S. B. Mizel . 
1999 . 
Induction of cytokine synthesis by ﬂagella from gram-negative bacteria may be dependent on the activation or differentiation state of human monocytes . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
67 : 5176 . 
21 . 
Galdiero , F. , C. de L'ero G , N. Benedetto , M. Galdiero , and M. A. Tufano . 
1993 . 
Release of cytokines induced by Salmonella typhimurium porins . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
61:155 . 
22 . 
Ciacci-Woolwine , F. , I. C. Blomﬁeld , S. H. Richardson , and S. B. Mizel . 
1998 . 
Salmonella ﬂagellin induces tumor necrosis factor a in a human promonocytic cell line . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
66:1127 . 
23 . 
Hueck , C. J. 1998 . 
Type III protein secretion systems in bacterial pathogens of animals and plants . 
Microbiol . 
Mol . 
Biol . 
Rev. 62:379 . 
24 . 
Hersh , D. , D. M. Monack , M. R. Smith , N. Ghori , S. Falkow , and A. Zychlinsky . 
1999 . 
The Salmonella invasin SipB induces macrophage apoptosis by binding to caspase-1 . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 96:2396 . 
25 . 
Hobbie , S. , L. M. Chen , R. J. Davis , and J. E. Galan . 
1997 . 
Involvement of mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways in the nuclear responses and cytokine production induced by Salmonella typhimurium in cultured intestinal epithelial cells . 
J. Immunol . 
159:5550 . 
26 . 
Zhou , D. , M. S. Mooseker , and J. E. Galan . 
1999 . 
Role of the S. typhimurium actin-binding protein SipA in bacterial internalization . 
Science 283:2092 . 
27 . 
Uchiya , K. , M. A. Barbieri , K. Funato , A. H. Shah , P. D. Stahl , and E. A. Groisman . 
1999 . 
A Salmonella virulence protein that inhibits cellular traf-ﬁcking . 
EMBO J. 18:3924 . 
28 . 
Hayward , R. D. , and V. Koronakis . 
1999 . 
Direct nucleation and bundling of actin by the SipC protein of invasive Salmonella . 
EMBO J. 18:4926 . 
29 . 
Heller , R. A. , M. Schena , A. Chai , D. Shalon , T. Bedilion , J. Gilmore , D. E. Woolley , and R. W. Davis . 
1997 . 
Discovery and analysis of inﬂammatory disease-related genes using cDNA microarrays . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 94 : 2150 . 
30 . 
DeRisi , J. , L. Penland , P. O. Brown , M. L. Bittner , P. S. Meltzer , M. Ray , Y. Chen , Y. A. Su , and J. M. Trent . 
1996 . 
Use of a cDNA microarray to analyse gene expression patterns in human cancer . 
Nat . 
Genet . 
14:457 . 
31 . 
Zhu , H. , J. P. Cong , G. Mamtora , T. Gingeras , and T. Shenk . 
1998 . 
Cellular gene expression altered by human cytomegalovirus : global monitoring with oligonucleotide arrays . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 95:14470 . 
32 . 
Teague , T. K. , D. Hildeman , R. M. Kedl , T. Mitchell , W. Rees , B. C. Schaefer , J. Bender , J. Kappler , and P. Marrack . 
1999 . 
Activation changes the spectrum but not the diversity of genes expressed by T cells . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 96:12691 . 
33 . 
DeRisi , J. L. , V. R. Iyer , and P. O. Brown . 
1997 . 
Exploring the metabolic and genetic control of gene expression on a genomic scale . 
Science 278:680 . 
34 . 
Wilson , M. , J. DeRisi , H. H. Kristensen , P. Imboden , S. Rane , P. O. Brown , and G. K. Schoolnik . 
1999 . 
Exploring drug-induced alterations in gene expression in mycobacterium tuberculosis by microarray hybridization . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 96:12833 . 
35 . 
Behr , M. A. , M. A. Wilson , W. P. Gill , H. Salamon , G. K. Schoolnik , S. Rane , and P. M. Small . 
1999 . 
Comparative genomics of BCG vaccines by whole-ge-nome DNA microarray . 
Science 284:1520 . 
36 . 
Steele-Mortimer , O. , S. Meresse , J. P. Gorvel , B. H. Toh , and B. B. Finlay . 
1999 . 
Biogenesis of Salmonella typhimurium-containing vacuoles in epithelial cells involves interactions with the early endocytic pathway . 
Cell . 
Microbiol . 
1:33 . 
37 . 
Gerhold , D. , T. Rushmore , and C. T. Caskey . 
1999 . 
DNA chips : promising toys have become powerful tools . 
Trends Biochem . 
Sci . 
24:168 . 
38 . 
Fang , F. C. 1997 . 
Perspectives series : host/pathogen interactions . 
Mechanisms of nitric oxide-related antimicrobial activity . 
J. Clin . 
Invest . 
99:2818 . 
39 . 
Widmer , U. , Z. Yang , S. van Deventer , K. R. Manogue , B. Sherry , and A. Cerami . 
1991 . 
Genomic structure of murine macrophage inﬂammatory pro-tein-1a and conservation of potential regulatory sequences with a human homolog , LD78 . 
J. Immunol . 
146:4031 . 
40 . 
Yamamoto , Y. , T. W. Klein , and H. Friedman . 
1996 . 
Induction of cytokine gran-ulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and chemokine macrophage inﬂammatory protein 2 mRNAs in macrophages by Legionella pneumophila or Salmonella typhimurium attachment requires different ligand-receptor systems . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
64:3062 . 
41 . 
Baggiolini , M. , B. Dewald , and B. Moser . 
1997 . 
Human chemokines : an update . 
Annu . 
Rev. Immunol . 
15:675 . 
42 . 
Lalmanach , A. C. , and F. Lantier . 
1999 . 
Host cytokine response and resistance to Salmonella infection . 
Microbes Infect . 
1:719 . 
43 . 
Mackey , M. F. , R. J. Barth , Jr. , and R. J. Noelle . 
1998 . 
The role of CD40/CD154 interactions in the priming , differentiation , and effector function of helper and cytotoxic T cells . 
J. Leukocyte Biol . 
63:418 . 
44 . 
Marriott , I. , E. K. Thomas , and K. L. Bost . 
1999 . 
CD40-CD40 ligand interactions augment survival of normal mice , but not CD40 ligand knockout mice , challenged orally with Salmonella dublin . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
67:5253 . 
45 . 
Carballo , E. , W. S. Lai , and P. J. Blackshear . 
1998 . 
Feedback inhibition of mac-rophage tumor necrosis factor-a production by tristetraprolin . 
Science 281:1001 . 
46 . 
Velasco , M. , M. J. Diaz-Guerra , P. Martin-Sanz , A. Alvarez , and L. Bosca . 
1997 . 
Rapid up-regulation of IkBb and abrogation of NF-kB activity in peritoneal macrophages stimulated with lipopolysaccharide . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
272:23025 . 
47 . 
Galdiero , M. , A. Marcatili , G. Cipollaro de l'Ero , I. Nuzzo , C. Bentivoglio , and C. Romano Carratelli . 
1999 . 
Effect of transforming growth factor b on experimental Salmonella typhimurium infection in mice . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
67:1432 . 
48 . 
Murphy , G. , and J. Gavrilovic . 
1999 . 
Proteolysis and cell migration : creating a path ? 
Curr . 
Opin . 
Cell Biol . 
11:614 . . 
49 . 
Henry , M. D. , and K. P. Campbell . 
1999 . 
Dystroglycan inside and out . 
Curr . 
Opin . 
Cell . 
Biol . 
11:602 . 
50 . 
Hemler , M. E. 1999 . 
Dystroglycan versatility . 
Cell 97:543 . 
51 . 
Aperlo , C. , L. Sevilla , S. Guerin , P. Pognonec , and K. E. Boulukos . 
1998 . 
Synergistic effects of colony-stimulating factor 1 and leukemia inhibitory factor in inducing early myeloid cell differentiation . 
Cell Growth Differ . 
9:929 . 
52 . 
McMahon , S. B. , and J. G. Monroe . 
1996 . 
The role of early growth response gene 1 ( egr-1 ) in regulation of the immune response . 
J. Leukocyte Biol . 
60:159 . 
53 . 
Valledor , A. F. , F. E. Borras , M. Cullell-Young , and A. Celada . 
1998 . 
Transcription factors that regulate monocyte/macrophage differentiation . 
J. Leukocyte Biol . 
63:405 . 
54 . 
Clarke , S. , and S. Gordon . 
1998 . 
Myeloid-speciﬁc gene expression . 
J. Leukocyte Biol . 
63:153 . 
55 . 
Vadiveloo , P. K. 1999 . 
Macrophages -- proliferation , activation , and cell cycle proteins . 
J. Leukocyte Biol . 
66:579 . 
56 . 
Krishnaraju , K. , B. Hoffman , and D. A. Liebermann . 
1997 . 
Lineage-speciﬁc regulation of hematopoiesis by HOX-B8 ( HOX-2 .4 ) : inhibition of granulocytic differentiation and potentiation of monocytic differentiation . 
Blood 90:1840 . 
57 . 
Girling , R. , J. F. Partridge , L. R. Bandara , N. Burden , N. F. Totty , J. J. Hsuan , and N. B. La Thangue . 
1993 . 
A new component of the transcription factor DRTF1 / E2F . 
[ Published erratum appears in 1993 Nature 365:468 . ] 
Nature 362:83 . 
58 . 
Martin , K. , D. Trouche , C. Hagemeier , and T. Kouzarides . 
1995 . 
Regulation of transcription by E2F1/DP1 . 
J. Cell Sci . 
Suppl . 
19:91 . 
59 . 
Wu , C. L. , M. Classon , N. Dyson , and E. Harlow . 
1996 . 
Expression of dominantnegative mutant DP-1 blocks cell cycle progression in G1 . 
Mol . 
Cell Biol . 
16 : 3698 . 
60 . 
Tao , Y. , R. F. Kassatly , W. D. Cress , and J. M. Horowitz . 
1997 . 
Subunit composition determines E2F DNA-binding site speciﬁcity . 
Mol . 
Cell Biol . 
17:6994 . 
61 . 
Taylor , G. A. , M. J. Thompson , W. S. Lai , and P. J. Blackshear . 
1995 . 
Phosphorylation of tristetraprolin , a potential zinc ﬁnger transcription factor , by mitogen stimulation in intact cells and by mitogen-activated protein kinase in vitro . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
270:13341 . 
62 . 
Lai , W. S. , E. Carballo , J. R. Strum , E. A. Kennington , R. S. Phillips , and P. J. Blackshear . 
1999 . 
Evidence that tristetraprolin binds to AU-rich elements and promotes the deadenylation and destabilization of tumor necrosis factor a mRNA . 
Mol . 
Cell Biol . 
19:4311 . 
63 . 
Taylor , G. A. , M. J. Thompson , W. S. Lai , and P. J. Blackshear . 
1996 . 
Mitogens stimulate the rapid nuclear to cytosolic translocation of tristetraprolin , a potential zinc-ﬁnger transcription factor . 
Mol . 
Endocrinol . 
10:140 . 
64 . 
Held , T. K. , X. Weihua , L. Yuan , D. V. Kalvakolanu , and A. S. Cross . 
1999 . 
g Interferon augments macrophage activation by lipopolysaccharide by two distinct mechanisms , at the signal transduction level and via an autocrine mechanism involving tumor necrosis factor a and interleukin-1 . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
67:206 . 
65 . 
Takashiba , S. , T. E. Van Dyke , S. Amar , Y. Murayama , A. W. Soskolne , and L. Shapira . 
1999 . 
Differentiation of monocytes to macrophages primes cells for lipopolysaccharide stimulation via accumulation of cytoplasmic nuclear factor kB . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
67:5573 . 
66 . 
Coleman , D. L. , A. H. Bartiss , V. P. Sukhatme , J. Liu , and H. D. Rupprecht . 
1992 . 
Lipopolysaccharide induces Egr-1 mRNA and protein in murine peritoneal macrophages . 
J. Immunol . 
149:3045 . 
67 . 
Klemsz , M. J. , R. A. Maki , T. Papayannopoulou , J. Moore , and R. Hromas . 
1993 . 
Characterization of the ets oncogene family member , ﬂi-1 . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
268 : 5769 . 
68 . 
Gusella , G. L. , E. Ayroldi , I. Espinoza-Delgado , and L. Varesio . 
1990 . 
Lipopoly-saccharide , but not IFN-g , down-regulates c-fms mRNA proto-oncogene expression in murine macrophages . 
J. Immunol . 
144:3574 . 
69 . 
Collart , M. A. , D. Belin , J. D. Vassalli , and P. Vassalli . 
1987 . 
Modulations of functional activity in differentiated macrophages are accompanied by early and transient increase or decrease in c-fos gene transcription . 
J. Immunol . 
139:949 . 
70 . 
Vadiveloo , P. K. , G. Vairo , A. K. Royston , U. Novak , and J. A. Hamilton . 
1998 . 
Proliferation-independent induction of macrophage cyclin D2 , and repression of cyclin D1 , by lipopolysaccharide . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
273:23104 . 
71 . 
Mannervik , M. 1999 . 
Target genes of homeodomain proteins . 
Bioessays 21:267 . 
72 . 
Cohen , P. , M. Bovaboula , M. Bellis , V. Baron , O. Jbilo , C. Poinot-Chazel , S. Galiegue , E. H. Hadibi , and P. Casellas . 
2000 . 
Monitoring cellular responses to Listeria monocytogenes with olignucleotide arrays . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
275:11181 .