INFECTION AND IMMUNITY , Feb. 2002 , p. 964 -- 969 
0019-9567/02 / $ 04.00 0 DOI : 10.1128 / IAI .70.2.964 -- 969.2002 Copyright © 2002 , American Society for Microbiology . 
All Rights Reserved . 
Nitric Oxide and Apoptosis Induced in Peyer’s Patches by Attenuated Strains of Salmonella enterica Serovar Enteritidis
. 
C. Cerquetti , * N. B. Goren , A. J. Ropolo , D. Grasso , M. N. Giacomodonato , and M. I. Vaccaro 
M 
Centro de Estudios Farmacológicos y Botánicos and Cátedra de Fisiologıa , Facultad de Medicina , Universidad de Buenos Aires , Buenos Aires , Argentina 
Received 6 September 2001/Accepted 1 November 2001 
Nitric oxide ( NO ) is a toxic molecule of the immune system which contributes to the control of microbial pathogens . 
Additional functions of NO in innate and adaptive immunity have recently been described ; these functions include the modulation of the cytokine response of lymphocytes and the regulation of immune cell apoptosis . 
In addition to direct microbicidal actions , NO has immunoregulatory effects relevant to the control of infections . 
In turn , infected macrophages and macrophage-regulating lymphocytes may undergo apoptosis during infection by Salmonella spp . 
In this work we investigated the ability of attenuated strains of Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis with different protective capacities to induce intestinal inducible nitric oxide synthase ( iNOS ) and apoptosis in Peyer 's patches ( PP ) in mice . 
Results showed that the intestinal iNOS activity correlated with increased apoptosis in PP . 
Furthermore , the ability to induce intestinal NO production and apoptosis within the ﬁrst few hours after immunization seemed to correlate with the protective capacity of mutant E/1/3 of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis . 
It was found that nonprotective mutant C/2/2 , which was unable to induce intestinal NO production , also failed to induce apoptosis in PP . 
Moreover , aminoguanidine treatment at the time of immunization resulted in inhibition of the NO production and apoptosis induced by protective mutant E/1/3 and completely abolished protection against challenge . 
These results suggest that the induction of iNOS in the intestinal mucosa by attenuated mutant E/1/3 of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis at the time of immunization is necessary to generate a protective immune response . 
The intestinal mucosa is an important route of entry for microbial pathogens . 
Following bacterial entry , intestinal epi-thelial cells rapidly initiate the innate immune response , upregulating the expression of proinﬂammatory molecules ( 22 ) . 
Thus , within the ﬁrst few hours after bacterial invasion , the intestinal mucosa produces mediators that have the potential to orchestrate the onset of an early inﬂammatory response ( 14 , 16 ) . 
Some of these mediators also have the potential to induce cellular apoptosis ( 9 ) . 
At the interface between the innate and acquired immune systems lies the high-output isoform of inducible nitric oxide synthase ( iNOS ) . 
Indeed , much of the attention on the killing of intracellular pathogens has recently focused on this remarkable molecular machine . 
Enteroinvasive bacteria directly activate expression of iNOS and NO production in intestinal epithelial cells ( 25 , 29 ) . 
The role of the epithelial cell-derived NO in the pathogenesis of enteric infections with invasive bacteria is still a matter of discussion . 
However , the evidence suggests an antimicrobial role of NO in the intestine . 
NO and/or its redox products can be cytostatic for enteric pathogens such as Salmonella spp . 
and may decrease microbial entry into epithelial cells by increasing the protective barrier through the release of epithelial mucus ( 3 ) and the induction of intestinal ﬂuid secretion ( 20 , 28 ) . 
In addition to direct microbicidal actions , NO has immuno-regulatory effects relevant to the control of infections ( 21 , 24 ) . 
Infected macrophages and macrophage-regulating lympho ¬ 
* Corresponding author . 
Mailing address : CEFYBO-CONICET , Serrano 669 , 1414 Buenos Aires , Argentina . 
Phone : 54 11 4857 1434 , 54 11 4855 7194 . 
Fax : 54 11 4856 2751 . 
E-mail : cerquetti@cotelcam . 
com.ar . 
cytes may undergo apoptosis during infection by Salmonella spp . 
Whether such apoptosis is best understood as the host depriving the pathogen of the protected niche or the pathogen disarming the host ( 27 ) is not clear . 
The effect of NO on cell apoptosis is controversial ; low levels of NO produced by activated macrophages delay apoptosis ( 17 ) , whereas high levels of NO can cause either apoptotic or necrotic death of host cells by reacting with a wide range of molecular targets ( 5 ) . 
Thus , the state of macrophage activation and NO production may affect not only the ability of macrophages to kill intracellular pathogens , but also the susceptibility of macrophages to apo-ptosis . 
Furthermore , apoptosis induction by bacterial infection of macrophages may contribute to the initiation of the immune response ( 30 ) . 
In this work , we studied the effect of inhibition of NO on the early stages of the immune response induced by attenuated mutants of Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis . 
Temperature-sensitive ( ts ) mutants isolated in our laboratory are able to replicate at 26 to 28 °C but show impaired growth at 37 °C ( nonpermissive temperature ) . 
Some ts mutants can not replicate at the nonpermissive temperature , whereas others are able to sustain limited replication at 37 °C before ceasing growth . 
The latter are known as coasters , and upon inoculation into a host , their activity resembles that seen in the early stages of the natural infection ( 19 ) . 
E/1/3 and C/2/2 are two isogenic mutants of the coaster phenotype . 
It was demonstrated that the ts mutant E/1/3 of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis induced excellent protection against lethal challenge in vaccinated mice and chickens ( 7 , 8 , 12 ) . 
Attenuated mutant C/2/2 is highly safe but does not induce protective immunity in mice ( 13 ) . 
Innate immunity plays an important role not only in the control of Salmonella spp . 
infections but also in the modulation a Animals were immunized intragastrically with bacteria on days 1 and 7 and received 0 or 1 mg of AG daily for 30 days , starting at day 0 . 
b All mice died within 5 days after bacterial inoculation . 
of the subsequent acquired immune responses . 
In this study , the early responses of the murine intestine to attenuated mutants of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis in vivo were compared . 
Protective mutant E/1/3 and nonprotective strain C/2/2 were used to study early induction of iNOS and cellular apoptosis in the murine intestine in vivo . 
96 
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals . 
Six - to 8-week-old BALB/c mice were purchased from the Instituto Nacional de Tecnologıa Agropecuaria Castelar , Buenos Aires , and kept in our animal house throughout the experiments . 
Bacteria . 
The wild-type strain of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis and attenuated derivatives ts E/1/3 and C/2/2 were used in the experiments . 
We have reported earlier that ts mutant E/1/3 protects mice and chickens from challenge with the virulent S. enterica serovar Enteritidis strain , whereas the C/2/2 mutant is nonprotective . 
Groups of 20 mice were inoculated intragastrically with 109 CFU of E/1/3 or C/2/2 mutant or the wild-type strain of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis . 
Animals received two bacterial inoculations a week apart ( day 1 and day 7 ) . 
To test the effect of aminoguanidine ( AG ) on the safety of the ts mutants , 10 mice of each group were injected intraperitoneally with 1 mg of AG daily for 30 days , starting at day 0 . 
Results are depicted in Table 1 . 
Inoculations and samples . 
Mice were inoculated intragastrically with 109 CFU of the bacterial suspension per animal . 
Animals were sacriﬁced 6 h after inoculation , and the intestines were removed immediately . 
For NOS activity determination , approximately 100 mg of small intestine containing at least one Peyer 's patch ( PP ) was removed and placed immediately in Kreb 's solution . 
Tissues for hematoxylin-eosin staining were ﬁxed in formalin . 
Samples for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) determinations were frozen immediately after removal . 
Protection experiments . 
Groups of 10 mice were immunized with two oral doses ( a week apart ) of 109 CFU of the attenuated strains of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis E/1/3 and C/2/2 per animal . 
Nonimmunized animals were included in the control group . 
Twenty-one days later , mice were challenged orally with 106 CFU of the virulent strain of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis per animal . 
To test the involvement of nitric oxide in the early stages of the immune response , a group of animals were injected with AG at the time of immunization with the protective mutant E/1/3 . 
Mice received two intraperitoneal injections with 1 mg of AG 24 h and 30 min before each immunization . 
NOS activity . 
NOS activity was measured by the production of [ 14C ] citrulline from [ 14C ] arginine according to the procedures described by Bredt and Synder ( 4 ) . 
Brieﬂy , after 20 min of incubation in Kreb 's Ringer bicarbonate solution ( KRB ) , tissues were transferred to 500 l of warmed KRB equilibrated with 5 % CO in oxygen in the presence of [ 14 2 C ] arginine ( 0.5 Ci ) . 
Tissues were incubated for 20 min under carbogen ( 95 % O2 and 5 % CO2 ) at 37 °C . 
Tissues were then homogenized in 1 ml of medium containing 20 nmol of HEPES ( pH 7.4 ) , 0.5 mmol of EDTA , 1 mmol of dithiothreitol , 1 mmol of leupeptin , and 0.2 mmol of phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride per liter at 4 °C . 
After centrifugation for 10 min at 2,000 g , supernatants were transferred to 2-ml columns of Dowex AG-50 WX-8 . 
[ 14C ] citrulline was eluted with 3 ml of distilled water and quantiﬁed by liquid scintillation counting . 
Apoptosis . 
PP were ﬁxed in 10 % buffered neutral formalin embedded in parafﬁn and cut . 
Some sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin . 
Apo-ptosis was detected by terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTPbiotin nick-end labeling ( TUNEL ) . 
Sections for TUNEL reactions were processed as described for the in situ cell death detection kit ( Boehringer Mannheim Biochemicals ) . 
Brieﬂy , tissue sections were heated at 60 °C for 30 min , followed by washing in xylene and rehydration through a graded series of ethanol and redistilled water . 
Sections were treated with proteinase K ( 20 g/ml in 10 mM Tris-HCl , pH 7.4 ) for 30 min at room temperature , washed , and overlaid with premixed TUNEL reaction mixture containing the components for the end labeling . 
The sections were labeled for 1 h at 37 °C , washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline ( PBS ) , mounted , and examined under light micros-copy . 
Percent apoptotic tissue . 
Apoptotic cells were counted in hematoxylin-eosin-stained sections using the morphometric procedure described by Zhou et al. ( 31 ) . 
Brieﬂy , sections were examined under light microscopy . 
Cells were scored as apoptotic if they exhibited cellular shrinkage with concurrent cytoplasmic eosin-ophilia , nuclear pyknosis , and fragmentation with associated apoptotic bodies . 
Digitized images of randomly selected ﬁelds were obtained and characterized morphometrically in terms of percent apoptotic lymphoid tissue . 
Images were captured , saved as PICT ﬁles , and analyzed using a double-density 25/125-point grid . 
The tissue beneath each grid point was categorized as normal lymphoid tissue , apoptotic lymphoid tissue , or other ( extracellular space , blood vessels , etc. ) . 
The number of points in each category was totaled individually for every animal . 
The percentage of apoptotic tissue for each animal was calculated from the area of lymphoid tissue : % area ( apoptotic ) ( area ( apoptotic ) / [ area ( normal ) area ( apoptotic ) ] ) 100 . 
Cell death detection by ELISA . 
DNA fragmentation was assessed by using a sandwich ELISA ( cell death detection ELISA kit ; Boehringer Mannheim , Indianapolis , Ind. ) . 
Brieﬂy , single-cell suspensions were prepared by smashing PP with a glass plunger against a ﬁne stainless steel wire net submerged in ice-cold PBS . 
Approximately 5 104 cells were lysed , and the cytosolic oligonucleosomes were quantitated using a biotin-coupled mouse monoclonal antihistone antibody as the capturing antibody , peroxidase-conjugated mouse monoclonal anti-DNA antibody as the detecting antibody , and ABTS ( 2,2 ' - azino-di [ 3-ethylbenzthiazo-line ] - sulfonate ) as the developing reagent . 
The relative increase in nucleosomes in the cytoplasm was expressed as an enrichment factor , calculated as the ratio of speciﬁc absorbance in lysates from treated mice compared with that in control animals , as described by the manufacturer . 
Statistics . 
Student 's t test was used to compare mean values . 
Medians were compared using the Wilcoxon rank sum test . 
No . 
of survivors/10 per group after oral infection of mice treated with AG at : 
Bacteria 
0 mg 
1 mg 
None Wild type 
10 0b 10 10 
10 0b 10 10 
E/1/3 ( protective ) C/2/2 ( nonprotective ) 
RESULTS
AG does not affect the safety of attenuated mutants E/1/3 and C/2/2 of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis . 
The main features of the attenuated strains of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis are depicted in Table 1 . 
Both mutants are highly safe ; mice inoculated with attenuated strain E/1/3 or C/2/2 showed no signs of disease . 
In fact , all animals survived the oral administration of 9 doses as high as 10 CFU . 
The 50 % lethal dose ( LD50 ) of both mutants is 1010 CFU . 
On the other hand , animals receiving 109 CFU of the wild-type strain of S. enterica serovar Enterit-idis died within 5 days after inoculation . 
The LD of the 50 4 wild-type strain of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis is 10 CFU . 
Daily treatment with AG did not modify the safety of the mutants . 
Wild-type strain and protective mutant of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis induce NOS activity in murine intestine . 
The pro-14 14 duction of [ C ] citrulline from [ C ] arginine was investigated in the murine intestine 6 h after oral administration of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis . 
Differences in NOS activity was found between animals inoculated with protective mutant E/1/3 and nonprotective mutant C/2/2 ( Table 2 ) . 
No differences in the enzymatic activity were found between animals immunized with nonprotective mutant C/2/2 and untreated mice . 
On the other hand , NOS activity induced by both wild-type and the attenuated mutant E/1/3 of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis was signiﬁcantly higher ( P 0.05 ) than that found in control mice . 
It is likely that this increase was due to the expression o a Signiﬁcantly different ( P 0.05 ) from value for nontreated control group , as calculated by the Student t test . 
inducible NOS ( iNOS ) , since enzymatic activities in immunized mice treated with AG and inoculated with the wild-type strain and the protective mutant E/1/3 were similar to those found in control mice ( Table 2 ) . 
Increased apoptosis in PP of mice immunized with the protective mutant E/1/3 . 
The ability of attenuated strains of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis to induce apoptosis in murine PP was evaluated using different assays . 
Apoptotic cells were counted in hematoxylin-eosin-stained sections using a morphometric procedure described in Materials and Methods ( Fig. 1 ) . 
Results showed that the percentage of apoptotic lymphoid tissue in PP of animals immunized with protective mutant E/1/3 ( median , 10 % ; range , 7 to 12 % ) was signiﬁcantly higher ( P 0.01 ) than that found in control mice ( median , 1 % ; range , 0.5 to 2 % ) . 
Animals immunized with mutant E/1/3 and treated with AG showed a percentage of apoptotic tissue similar to that of the control group . 
Histopathologic changes induced by S. enterica serovar Enteritidis in PP were evident 6 h after oral administration . 
Scattered small focal aggregates of leukocytes undergoing apopto-tic death were found in the PP of mice inoculated with nonprotective mutant C/2/2 ( data not shown ) . 
Affected foci contained shrunken , apoptotic cells with nuclear chromatin condensation , margination , or fragmentation that were dispersed among apoptotic bodies . 
Similar but more extensive cellular apoptosis was evident in the PP of mice inoculated with protective mutant E/1/3 and the wild-type strain of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis ( data not shown ) . 
TUNEL reactions were performed in PP sections ( Fig. 2 ) . 
There was a dramatic increase in the number and size of TUNEL-positive foci in the PP of mice immunized with protective mutant E/1/3 compared with those observed in mice receiving the nonprotective mutant C/2/2 . 
The number and size of TUNEL-positive foci in PP from animals immunized with E/1/3 and treated with AG were not different from those seen in control mice ( data not shown ) . 
Similar results were obtained when DNA fragmentation was assessed in PP of animals immunized with the attenuated strains of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis ( Fig. 3 ) . 
Again , statistically signiﬁcant differences ( P 0.05 ) were found in mice immunized with the protective mutant E/1/3 compared with the control group . 
DNA fragmentation in the PP of mice inoculated with nonprotective mutant C/2/2 was no different from that seen in the control animals . 
AG inhibited the increase in DNA fragmentation induced by protective mutant E/1/3 . 
E/1/3 ( protective ) C/2/2 ( nonprotective ) 
AG treatment at the time of immunization inhibits the protection induced by attenuated mutant E/1/3 . 
The protective capacity of mutant E/1/3 was investigated in mice treated with AG . 
The inhibition of NO production at the time of immuni-zation completely abolished protection induced by mutant E/1/3 ; the survival rate of AG-treated mice ( 0 of 10 ) was similar to that of control mice ( 0 of 10 ) ( Fig. 4 ) . 
Animals from these groups died within 5 days after challenge . 
On the other hand , 30 days after challenge , the survival rate of animals immunized with E/1/3 was 9 of 10 ( 90 % protection ) . 
Differences between the survival rates of mice immunized with E/1/3 and AG-treated or control mice were signiﬁcant ( P 0.01 ) . 
Mean intestinal NOS activity ( pmol/g ) SE ( n 6 ) in mice treated with AG at : 
Bacteria 
0 mg 
1 mg 
None Wild type 
259 56 515 70a 599 44a 322 65 
264 60 313 62 300 45 247 55 
E/1/3 ( protective ) C/2/2 ( nonprotective ) 
DISCUSSION
During the course of infection with pathogens such as Sal-monella spp. , intestinal epithelial cells upregulate the expression of certain host genes ( 11 , 16 ) . 
This epithelial cell inﬂammatory program induces the expression of proinﬂammatory molecules such as NO . 
Although the NO pathway probably evolved to protect the host from infection , its suppressive effects on lymphocyte proliferation and damage to other normal host cells confer on NO the same destructive/protective duality . 
Therefore , NO toxicity is not a constant value , and NO may confer cell protection as well . 
In part , this is understood by transcription and translation of protective proteins , such as cyclooxygenase-2 . 
Alternatively , protection may result as a consequence of diffusion-controlled NO-O2 ( superoxide ) interaction that redirects the apoptosis-initiating activity of NO towards protection . 
In this regard , NO is endowed with the unique ability to initiate and to block apoptosis , depending on multiple variables ( 6 ) . 
Proapoptotic effects ( e.g. , in macrophages or T lymphocytes ) were observed with high concentrations of exogenous NO . 
NO might promote apoptotic events by upregulating the cell surface receptor Fas or its ligand FasL , although it can also induce apoptosis without measurable modulation of Fas or FasL ( 1 ) . 
On the other hand , an antiapoptotic function of endogenous NO generated by iNOS has been observed in 
E/1/3 ( protective ) C/2/2 ( nonprotective ) 
FIG. 1 . 
Morphometry of apoptotic cells in PP of mice immunized with protective and nonprotective mutants of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis . 
Mice were inoculated intragastrically with 109 CFU/animal of the bacterial suspension . 
Animals were sacriﬁced 6 h after inoculation , and PP were removed aseptically . 
Apoptotic cells were counted in hematoxylin-eosin-stained sections using the morphometric procedures described in Materials and Methods . 
Mice treated with AG received two intraperitoneal inoculations ( 1 mg ) , 24 h and 30 min before immunization . 
Data are medians ( n 5 ) . 
Asterisk indicates values signiﬁcantly different ( P 0.01 ) from those for control mice . 
Results are representative of three separate experiments 
FIG. 3 . 
Apoptosis in PP of mice immunized with protective and nonprotective mutants of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis . 
Apoptosis was assessed using a cell death detection ELISA . 
The y axis represents DNA fragmentation , as measured by the enrichment factor ( see Materials and Methods ) . 
Mice treated with AG received two intraperito-neal inoculations ( 1 mg ) , 24 h and 30 min before immunization . 
Data are median enrichment factors for six animals . 
Asterisk indicates signiﬁcantly different values ( P 0.05 ) versus control mice . 
Results are representative of three separate experiments . 
B-cell lines , macrophages , and T lymphocytes ( 2 ) . 
In mouse macrophages , nontoxic concentrations of NO lead to the activation of the transcription factors NF - B and AP-1 and the subsequent expression of cyclooxygenase-2 , which protect mac-rophages against apoptosis ( 26 ) . 
FIG. 2 . 
TUNEL-positive reactions were observed in PP from mice immunized with attenuated strains of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis as well as in control mice , although there were differences in localization . 
In control animals ( A ) , apoptotic cells appeared evenly distributed , whereas mice immunized with S. enterica serovar Enteritidis mutants showed apoptosis in germinal centers . 
Affected foci in PP of mice inoculated with protective mutant E/1/3 ( B ) were increased in number and size compared with those seen in animals receiving the nonprotective mutant C/2/2 ( C ) . 
FIG. 4 . 
Effect of AG on the protection induced by attenuated mutant E/1/3 of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis . 
Mice were immunized with two oral doses of 109 CFU of the attenuated mutants E/1/3 and C/2/2 of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis . 
Twenty-one days later , mice were 6 challenged orally with 10 CFU/animal of the virulent strain of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis . 
Mice treated with AG received two intra-peritoneal inoculations ( 1 mg ) , 24 h and 30 min before each immuni-zation with the protective mutant E/1/3 
Wild-type S. enterica serovar Enteritidis and its derivative , the protective mutant E/1/3 , induced intestinal iNOS-derived NO within the ﬁrst few hours after inoculation . 
Results showed that the intestinal iNOS activity induced by S. enterica serovar Enteritidis correlated with increased apoptosis in PP . 
Furthermore , the ability to induce intestinal NO production and apo-ptosis in PP soon after immunization seemed to correlate with the protective capacity of mutant E/1/3 . 
It was found that nonprotective mutant C/2/2 , which was unable to induce intes-tinal NO production , also failed to induce apoptosis in PP . 
Moreover , AG treatment at the time of immunization resulted in the inhibition of NO production and apoptosis induced by protective mutant E/1/3 , and completely abolished protection against challenge . 
To date , there is no doubt that reactive nitrogen intermediates are integral parts of signaling pathways of immunological importance , regulating cytokine responses and cell survival and contributing to tissue damage , as seen in autoimmune diseases . 
Recent studies provided support for the importance of iNOS in immunoregulation and suggested that chronic stimulation of iNOS in vivo may have profound effects on subsequent immune responses ( 15 ) . 
The mechanisms through which NO could regulate the initiation of a protective immune response were not investigated , although the induction of apoptosis in PP can not be ruled out . 
In recent experiments , Yrlid and Wick showed that apoptosis induced during bacterial infection is not a quiescent death that allows the bacteria to escape recognition by the immune system , but rather may contribute to an anti-microbial immune response ( 30 ) . 
The authors demonstrated that bacterially induced apoptosis of infected cells results in presentation of a bacterium-encoded antigen on both major histocompatibility complexes I and II by bystander dendritic cells ( 30 ) . 
Attenuated strains of Salmonella spp . 
can be used as vehicles for delivery and expression of vaccine antigens . 
Murine models of infection have been used extensively to evaluate both the pathogenicity of and immune responses against Salmonella spp . 
Early studies performed by Eisenstein and coworkers tested a panel of attenuated strains of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis and S. enterica serovar Dublin and found that in many cases NO induction correlated with immunosuppression and protection . 
In one case , the PhoP mutant , protection occurred without NO induction ( 10 , 18 , 23 ) . 
It was also reported that treatment with AG inhibits immu-nosuppression and potentiates Salmonella infection ( 18 ) . 
Moreover , inhibition of NO resulted in 90 % mortality in mice inoculated with highly attenuated mutant SL3235 ( 18 ) . 
With a different mouse model of infection , we showed that the ability to induce intestinal NO correlated with the protective capacity of the attenuated mutants of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis . 
Further , treatment with AG ( 1 mg daily ) did not modiﬁed the safety of the E/1/3 and C/2/2 mutants . 
Note that PhoP mutants were not studied in the present work , and , in addition , important differences exist between the murine model used by the Eisenstein group and ours ( route of immunization , AG treatment , method for measuring NO , etc. ) . 
Nevertheless , it is clear from both animal models that NO actively participates in the initiation of the immune response induced by Salmonella spp . 
Our results suggest that NO is involved in the very early phase of the immune response , since inhibition of iNOS at the time of immunization inhibited protection . 
The role of innate immune responses in promoting speciﬁc immune responses is an interesting area for research that may deﬁne important principles of bacterial interactions with immune cells . 
Here we present evidence that induction of NOS in the intestinal mucosa by attenuated mutant E/1/3 of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis is necessary to generate a protective immune response . 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The excellent technical assistance of Marıa Isabel Bernal is gratefully acknowledged . 
This work was supported in part by Ministerio de Salud , Subsecretarıa de Investigación y Tecnologıa , `` Beca Carrillo-Oñativia , '' and Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientıﬁcas y Técnicas ( CONICET ) . 
REFERENCES 
1 . 
Bogdan , C. , M. Rollinghoff , and A. Diefenbach . 
2000 . 
Reactive oxygen and reactive nitrogen intermediates in innate and speciﬁc immunity . 
Curr . 
Opin . 
Immunol . 
12:64 -- 76 . 
2 . 
Bogdan , C. 2000 . 
The function of nitric oxide in the immune system , p. 443 -- 493 . 
In M. B. Heidelberg ( ed . ) 
, Handbook of experimental pharmacology : nitric oxide . 
Springer , Berlin , Germany . 
3 . 
Branka , J. E. , G. Vallette , A. Jarry , and C. L. Laboisse . 
1997 . 
Stimulation of mucin exocytosis from human epithelial cells by nitric oxide : evidence for a cGMP-dependent and a cGMP-independent pathway . 
Biochem . 
J. 323:521 -- 524 . 
4 . 
Bredt , D. S. , and S. H. Snyder . 
1989 . 
Nitric oxide mediates glutamate-linked enhancement of cyclic GMP levels in the cerebellum . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 86:9030 -- 9033 . 
5 . 
Brune , B. , A. Von Knethen , and K. B. Sandau . 
1998 . 
Nitric oxide and its role in apoptosis . 
Eur . 
J. Pharmacol . 
26:261 -- 272 . 
6 . 
Brune , B. , A. Von Knethen , and K. B. Sandau . 
1999 . 
Nitric oxide ( NO ) : an effector of apoptosis . 
Cell Death Differ . 
6:969 -- 975 . 
7 . 
Cerquetti , M. C. , and M. M. Gherardi . 
2000 . 
Vaccination of chickens with a temperature-sensitive mutant of Salmonella enteritidis . 
Vaccine 6:1140 -- 1145 . 
8 . 
Cerquetti , M. C. , and M. M. Gherardi . 
2000 . 
Orally administered attenuated Salmonella enteritidis reduces cecal carriage of virulent challenge organisms . 
Vet . 
Microbiol . 
76:185 -- 192 . 
9 . 
Chung , H. T. , H. O. Pae , B. M. Choi , T. R. Billiar , and Y. M. Kim . 
2001 . 
Nitric oxide as a bioregulator of apoptosis . 
Biochem . 
Biophys . 
Res . 
Commun . 
282:1075 -- 1079 . 
10 . 
Eisenstein , T. K. , J. J. Jr Meissler , S. I. Miller , and B. A. Stocker . 
1998 . 
Immunosuppression and nitric oxide production induced by parental live Salmonella vaccines do no correlate with protective capacity : a phoP : : Tn10 mutant does not suppress but does protect . 
Vaccine 16:24 -- 32 . 
11 . 
Elewaut , D. , J. A. DiDonato , J. K. Kim , F. Truong , L. Eckmann , and M. F. Kagnoff . 
1999 . 
NF-kappa B is a central regulator of the intestinal epithelial cell innate immune response induced by infection with enteroinvasive bacteria . 
J. Immunol . 
163:1457 -- 1466 . 
12 . 
Gherardi , M. M. , V. E. Garcıa , D. O. Sordelli , and M. C. Cerquetti . 
1993 . 
Protective capacity of a temperature-sensitive mutant of Salmonella enteritidis after oral and intragastric inoculation in a murine model . 
Vaccine 11:19 -- 24 . 
13 . 
Gherardi , M. M. , D. O. Sordelli , and M. C. Cerquetti . 
1995 . 
Relevance of local and systemic humoral immunity to efﬁcacy of immunization with live-attenuated Salmonella enteritidis . 
Vaccine Res . 
4:19 -- 27 . 
14 . 
Kagnoff , M. F. , and L. Eckmann . 
1997 . 
Epithelial cells as sensors for microbial infection . 
J. Clin . 
Investig . 
100:6 -- 10 . 
15 . 
Kahn , D. A. , D. C. Archer , D. P. Gold , and C. J. Kelly . 
2001 . 
Adjuvant immunotherapy is dependent on inducible nitric oxide synthase . 
J. Exp . 
Med . 
193:1261 -- 1267 . 
16 . 
Kim , J. M. , L. Eckmann , T. C. Savidge , D. C. Lowe , T. Witthoft , and M. F. Kagnoff . 
1998 . 
Apoptosis of human intestinal epithelial cells after bacterial invasion . 
J. Clin . 
Investig . 
102:1815 -- 1823 . 
17 . 
Kim , Y. M. , R. V. Talanian , J. Li , and T. R. Billiar . 
1998 . 
Nitric oxide prevents IL-1beta and IFN-gamma-inducing factor ( IL-18 ) release from macrophages by inhibiting caspase-1 ( IL-1beta-converting enzyme ) . 
J. Immunol . 
161:4122 -- 4128 . 
18 . 
MacFarlane , A. S. , M. G. Schwacha , and T. K. Eisenstein . 
1999 . 
In vivo blockage of nitric oxide with aminoguanidine inhibits immunosuppression induced by an attenuated strain of Salmonella typhimurium , potentiates Sal-monella infection , and inhibits macrophages and polymorphonuclear leukocytes inﬂux into the spleen . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
67:891 -- 898 . 
19 . 
Morris Hooke , A. 1994 . 
Temperature-sensitive mutants of bacterial patho 
gens : isolation and use to determine host clearance and in vivo replication rates . 
Methods Enzymol . 
235:448 -- 457 . 
20 . 
Mourad , F. H. , L. J. O'Donnell , E. A. Andre , C. P. Bearcroft , R. A. Owen , M. L. Clark , and M. J. Farthing . 
1996 . 
L-Arginine , nitric oxide , and intestinal secretion : studies in rat jejunum in vivo . 
Gut 39:539 -- 544 . 
21 . 
Nathan , C. , and M. U. Shiloh . 
2000 . 
Reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermediates in the relationship between mammalian hosts and microbial patho-gens . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 97:8841 -- 8848 . 
22 . 
Scherer , C. A. , and S. I. Miller . 
2001 . 
Molecular pathogenesis of Salmonellae , p. 265 -- 333 . 
In E. A. Groisman ( ed . ) 
, Principles of bacterial pathogenesis , Academic Press , New York , N.Y. 23 . 
Schwacha , M. G. , J. J. Meissler , Jr. , and T. K. Eisenstein . 
1998 . 
Salmonella typhimurium infection in mice induces nitric oxide-mediated immunosuppression through a natural killer cell-dependent pathway . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
66:5862 -- 5866 . 
24 . 
Shiloh , M. U. , and C. F. Nathan . 
2000 . 
Reactive nitrogen intermediates and the pathogenesis of Salmonella and mycobacteria . 
Curr . 
Opin . 
Microbiol . 
3:35 -- 42 . 
25 . 
Vazquez-Torres , A. , and F. C. Fang . 
2001 . 
Oxygen-dependent anti-Salmo-nella activity of macrophages . 
Trends Microbiol . 
9:29 -- 33 . 
26 . 
von Knethen , A. , D. Callsen , and B. Brune . 
1999 . 
NF B and AP-1 activation by nitric oxide attenuated apoptosis cell death in RAW 264.7 macrophages . 
Mol . 
Biol . 
Cell 10:361 -- 372 . 
27 . 
Weinrauch , Y. , and A. Zychlinsky . 
1999 . 
The induction of apoptosis by bacterial pathogens . 
Annu . 
Rev. Microbiol . 
53:155 -- 187 . 
28 . 
Wilson , K. T. , A. B. Vaandrager , J. De Vente , M. W. Musch , H. R. De Jonge , and E. B. Chang . 
1996 . 
Production and localization of cGMP and PGE in 2 nitroprusside-stimulated rat colonic ion transport . 
Am . 
J. Physiol . 
270 : C832-C840 . 
29 . 
Witthoft , T. , L. Eckmann , J. M. Kim , and M. F. Kagnoff . 
1998 . 
Enteroinvasive bacteria directly activate expression of iNOS and NO production in human colon epithelial cells . 
Am . 
J. Physiol . 
275 : G564-G571 . 
30 . 
Yrlid , U. , and M. J. Wick . 
2000 . 
Salmonella-induced apoptosis of infected macrophages results in presentation of a bacteria-encoded antigen after uptake by bystander dendritic cells . 
J. Exp . 
Med . 
191:613 -- 623 . 
31 . 
Zhou , H. R. , J. R. Harkema , J. A. Hotchkiss , D. Yang , R. A. Roth , and J. J. Pestka . 
1999 . 
Lipopolysaccharide and the trichothecene vomitoxin ( deoxynivalenol ) synergistically induce apoptosis in murine lymphoid organs . 
Toxicol . 
Sci . 
53:253 -- 263 .