Copyright 2006 by the Genetics Society of America DOI : 10.1534 / genetics .105.054700 
The Cotranscribed Salmonella enterica sv . 
Typhi tsx and impX Genes Encode Opposing Nucleoside-Speciﬁc Import and Export Proteins 
Sergio A. Bucarey , * Nicolas A. Villagra , † Juan A. Fuentes * and Guido C. Mora † ,1 
* Program 
a Doctorado de Genética Molecular y Microbiologıa , Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile and † Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas , Universidad Andrés Bello , Santiago , Chile Manuscript received December 14 , 2005 Accepted for publication February 16 , 2006 
ABSTRACT
The Salmonella enterica tsx gene encodes a nucleoside-speciﬁc outer membrane channel . 
The Tsx porin is essential for the prototrophic growth of S. enterica sv . 
Typhi in the absence of nucleosides . 
RT -- PCR analysis shows that the tsx gene is cotranscribed with an open reading frame unique to S. enterica , impX ( STY0450 ) , which encodes an inner membrane protein 108 amino acids in length , which is predicted to have only two transmembrane a-helices . 
Fusions of the lacZ gene to both tsx and impX reveal that the transcription of both genes is induced in the presence of adenosine . 
A null mutation in the S. Typhi impX gene suppresses the induced auxotrophy for adenosine or thymidine resulting from a tsx mutation and confers sensitivity to high concentrations of adenosine or thymidine . 
The ImpX protein , when tagged with a 3xFLAG epitope , is functional and associates with the inner membrane ; impX mutants are defective in the export of 3H-radiolabeled thymidine . 
Taken together , these and other results suggest that the S. Typhi Tsx porin and ImpX inner membrane protein facilitate competing mechanisms of thymidine inﬂux and efﬂux , respectively , to maintain the steady-state levels of internal nucleoside pools . 
THE outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria forms a protective permeability barrier around the cells and serves as a molecular sieve . 
For this reason , channels are present in the outer membrane to mediate the transport of nutrients and ions across the outer membrane into the periplasm . 
These channels can be divided into three classes : the general porins , the substrate-speciﬁc porins , and the active transporters ( Nikaido 2003 ) . 
The general porins , including OmpC and OmpF , form trimeric , water-ﬁlled pores in the outer membrane through which relatively small ( ,600 Da ) , abundant solutes diffuse , a process driven by their concentration gradients ( Benson and Decloux 1985 ; Nikaido 1994 ) . 
For nutrients that are present at low ( ,1 mm ) concentrations in the extracellular environment , passive diffusion is not efﬁcient and transport occurs via substrate-speciﬁc and active transporters . 
The substrate-speciﬁc porins contain medium-afﬁnity ( micromolars to millimolars ) substrate-binding sites that can be saturated , yet allow the efﬁcient diffusion of substrates with shallow concentration gradients ( Hantke 1976 ; McKeown et al. 1976 ; Nikaido 1994 ) . 
The substrate-speciﬁc porins include LamB ( maltose and maltodextrins ; Luckey and Nikaido 1980 ) , ScrY ( sucrose ; Hardesty et al. 1991 ) , OprB ( glucose ; Trias et al. 1988 ) , OprD ( basic amino acids ; Triasand Nikaido 
1Corresponding author : Laboratorio de Microbiologıa , Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas , Universidad Andrés Bello , República 217 , Santiago , Chile . 
E-mail : gmora@unab.cl 
1990 ) , and Tsx ( nucleosides ; Hantke 1976 ; McKeown et al. 1976 ) . 
Both eukaryotes and prokaryotes salvage nucleosides for acting as precursors for nucleic acid synthesis and , in several cases , to serve as carbon and nitrogen sources ( Hantke 1976 ; McKeown et al. 1976 ; Acimovic and Coe 2002 ) . 
In gram-negative enteric bacteria , the ﬁrst step in this salvage process is the transport of nucleosides across the outer membrane into the periplasm , mediated by the Tsx family of porins . 
After traversing the periplasmic space , nucleosides are transported across the inner membrane into the cytoplasm by the transporters NupC and NupG ( Westh Hansen et al. 1987 ; Munch-Petersen and Jensen 1990 ; Craig et al. 1994 ; Norholm and Dandanell 2001 ) . 
In previous studies of the Salmonella enterica sv . 
Typhi ( S. Typhi ) Tsx porin , we found that Tsx is among the proteins in outer membrane preparations whose expression increases dramatically in response to anaerobiosis , a condition that favors the virulence of this pathogen . 
Surprisingly , we found that Tsx is essential for the prototrophic growth of S. Typhi in the absence of nucleosides . 
On the basis of these and other results , we have proposed that the Tsx porin plays a critical role in the assembly and integrity of the S. Typhi membrane , and thus in the virulence of S. Typhi ( Bucarey et al. 2005 ) . 
In this article , we show that a short open reading frame ( ORF ) adjacent to the S. Typhi tsx gene , impX ( STY0450 ) , encodes an additional product that mediates nucleoside transport across the S. Typhi membrane . 
Genetics 173 : 25 -- 34 ( May 2006 
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Bacterial strains , media , and growth conditions : The S. Typhi strains used in this study are derivatives of the wild-type strain STH2370 and are listed in Table 1 . 
Bacteria were grown routinely at 37 and aerated by vigorous shaking . 
Rich medium used for growth was LB medium ; deﬁned medium was M9-glucose medium supplemented with cysteine and tryptophan 50 mg liter 1 , hereafter referred to as `` minimal medium . '' 
When required , LB medium was supplemented with ampicillin ( Amp ; 100 mg liter 1 ) , chloramphenicol ( Cam ; 25 mg liter 1 ) , kanamycin ( Kan ; 50 mg liter 1 ) , arabinose ( 2 mg ml 1 ) , and/or glucose ( 2 mg ml 1 ) . 
Solid media included 15 g liter 1 agar ( Agar -- agar , Merck ) . 
PBS buffer is NaH2PO4 7H2O 55 mg ml 1 ; K2HPO4 , 15 mg ml 1 ; NaCl , 4.25 mg ml 1 . 
Nucleosides and other reagents and chemicals were from Sigma ( St. Louis ) . 
Escherichia coli strain DH5a ( endA1 hsdR17 [ r-m1 ] supE44 thi-1 recA1 gyrA [ NalR ] relA1 D [ lacZYA-argF ] U169 deoR [ u80D { lacZ } M15 ] ) was used as the host for the selection and preparation of plasmids . 
Mutant constructions : Mutant derivatives of S. Typhi STH2370 with deletions of the tsx , impX , and jajI genes , and concomitant insertions of kanamycin ( KanR ) - or chloramphenicol ( CamR ) - resistance cassettes were constructed using the method of Datsenko and Wanner ( 2000 ) . 
PCR primers 60 bases long overlapping the start and stop codons of each gene were synthesized with 40 base 59-ends corresponding to the ends of the desired substitutions . 
The primers used for each gene were ( start and stop codons are in boldface type ) : tsx ( H1 1 P1 ) 59-CAGTGGCATACATATGAAAAAAACTTTAC TCGCAGTCAGCTGTAGGCTGGAGC TGCTTCG , tsx ( H2 1 P2 ) CTTTTTTGCAGGTTTAGAAGTTGTAACCCACGACCAGGT ACATATGAATATCCTCCTTAG , impX ( H1 1 P1 ) GGCGCATG CTGCCATGCGGCGGCGAGTCGCGCCCACTTCATGTAGGC TGGAGC TGCTTCG , impX ( H2 1 P2 ) 59-GAGCAGAGTAGAA TCAGCGGTAAGCCGGGGCAACCCGGTGCATATGAATATCC TCCTTAG , jajI ( H1 1 P1 ) GGAAATGATCGACATGACAAGACG TTACCTAAGAATTCTCTGTAGGCTGGAGCTGCTTCG , and jajI ( H2 1 P2 ) TCCGCCAGAACGTTTATTGATTAACAGGCT GAATATCATGCATATGAATATCCT CCTTAG . 
The 39 20 bases of each primer ( underlined ) were annealed to the 59 - or 39-ends of Cam or KanR cassettes ﬂanked by FRT sites in template plasmids pKD3 and pKD4 , respectively ( Datsenko and Wanner 2000 ) . 
PCR reactions using Taq DNA polymerase were made according to the manufacturer 's instructions ( Life Technologies ) . 
STH2370 carrying plasmid pKD46 ( encoding the l-Red recombinase functions ) was grown at 30 in LB medium with Amp and 1 mm arabinose , made electrocompetent , and electroporated with 500 ng of each PCR product . 
Electroporated cells were plated on LB medium with Cam or Kan at 37 . 
Substitution mutations in recombinant strains resulting from this procedure were moved into a clean wild-type background by electroporation with linear chromosomal DNA as described by Toro et al. ( 1998 ) . 
The presence of each substitution mutation was con-ﬁrmed by PCR ampliﬁcation , using primers complementary to the S. Typhi genome ﬂanking the sites of substitution . 
After backcrosses , resistance determinants were eliminated to avoid polar effects using plasmid pCP20 , an AmpR plasmid that is temperature sensitive for replication and the production of FLP recombinase ( Datsenko and Wanner 2000 ) . 
S. Typhi CamR or KanR mutants were transformed with pCP20 , AmpR recombinants were selected at 30 , and isolated colonies were puriﬁed at 37 before testing for loss of antibiotic resistance . 
After the elimination of resistance cassettes , we obtained nonpolar mutations , as described previously by Datsenko and Wanner ( 2000 ) . 
Cloning and complementation of the S. Typhi tsx-impX operon : To clone the tsx-impX operon , we ampliﬁed a 1.9-kb fragment of S. Typhi STH2370 DNA , including the tsx and impX coding sequences and their upstream promoter with primers TAGAATTCTACGGGCAAATTCAGGGCACTA and TTGAATGTTAGGTTACGCTTC . 
The PCR fragment was pu-riﬁed and ligated to AmpR plasmid vector pGEM-T ( Promega , Madison , WI ) . 
The ligation mix was electroporated into E. coli host strain DH5a , and recombinants that form white colonies on LB Amp plates with 0.5 mm IPTG and 40 mg/ml X-gal at 37 were screened . 
Plasmid DNA puriﬁed from one clone yielded an insert of the predicted size after digestion with EcoRI . 
Thi plasmid , pGEMTtsx-impX , was electroporated into S. Typhi Dtsx DimpX ; AmpR recombinants were found to have a wildtype phenotype ( our unpublished results ) . 
Phenotypic analysis of S. Typhi mutants : A modiﬁcation of the disk diffusion assay ( Bauer et al. 1966 ) was used to determine the auxotrophic requirements of mutant strains , as well as their sensitivities to nucleosides . 
Assays to measure the efﬁciencies of plating of wild-type and mutant strains in the presence of nucleosides were performed as described previously ( Bucarey et al. 2005 ) and in the text . 
Efﬁciencies of plating are expressed as the titers of colony-forming units on media with or without nucleosides , divided by the titer of the wild-type strain on media without nucleosides . 
Subcellular fractionation of inner and outer membrane proteins : Membrane fractions were prepared as described by Lobos and Mora ( 1991 ) on the basis of the modiﬁcation of the method of Schnaitman ( 1971 ) . 
Bacteria were grown to midexponential phase , chilled on ice , pelleted by centrifugation at 3000 3 g for 15 min at 4 , resuspended in lysis buffer ( Tris -- HCl 10 mm pH 8 , 10 mm MgCl2 ) , sonicated , and then supplemented to 2 mm phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride . 
Whole cells and debris were removed by low-speed centrifugation ( 3000 3 g , 10 min ) , and total membrane fractions were obtained after 45 min of centrifugation at 13,000 3 g at 4 . 
Inner membrane fractions were solubilized with 2 % Triton X-100 , and the outer membrane fraction was pelleted by centrifugation at 13,000 3 g and solubilized in 50 ml of Tris -- HCl 100 mm , pH 8 buffer , 1 % SDS . 
Supernatants containing proteins associated with the inner membrane were precipitated by the addition of trichloroacetic acid to 10 % , washed twice with acetone , dried , and resuspended in 50 ml of Tris -- HCl 100 mm , pH 8 buffer , 1 % SDS . 
Proteins were separated in 12 % SDS -- polyacrylamide gels . 
Epitope tagging : A fusion of the sequence encoding the 3xFLAG epitope with the impX gene was constructed using the method of Datsenko and Wanner ( 2000 ) as modiﬁed by Uzzau et al. ( 2001 ) . 
Primers were designed with 36 - to 40-base 59 extensions corresponding to the 39-end of the impX coding sequence and to the region immediately downstream of impX to amplify plasmid pSUB11 . 
The sequences of the primers used are : FLAG-impX1 CGCAACATTGCGCCTCACCGGGTT GCCCCGGCTTACCGCGACTACAAAGACCATGACGG and FLAG-impX2 CTGACATTTTTTCAGCCCCGGAGTTTGTCG CCAGCCCCAACATATGAATATCCT CCTTAG . 
The PCR product was used to transform strain STH2370 carrying plasmid pKD46 . 
The presence of the genetic fusion was conﬁrmed by PCR ampliﬁcation , using primers complementary to the S. Typhi genome ﬂanking the fusion . 
Immunoblot analysis : The 3xFLAG fusion protein was detected in immunoblots by the use of anti-FLAG M2 monoclonal antibody from Sigma . 
Strains carrying the epitope-tagged gene were grown in cultures ( 2 ml ) to stationary phase and centrifuged . 
Bacterial pellets were resuspended in 50 ml of 100 mm Tris -- HCl ( pH 8 ) , mixed with 50 ml of Laemmli lysis buffer , and incubated at 100 for 10 min . 
The resulting lysates were centrifuged to remove cell debris and resolved by SDS -- PAGE . 
Total bacterial lysates and inner and outer membrane fractions were resolved by SDS -- PAGE , transferred to polyviny-lidenediﬂuoride ( PDVF ) membranes , and probed with mouse antiﬂag Ab M2 ( 1:10,000 ) and then with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG [ 1:5000 ( Sigma ) ] . 
Alkaline phosphatase activity was revealed by using the nitroblue tetrazolium -- 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolylphosphate dye system . 
Assays for b-galactosidase activity : S. Typhi mutant strains with lacZY fusions were grown to an OD600nm of 0.2 and then chilled to 4 . 
b-Galactosidase activities were assayed as described and are expressed in Miller units , 103 3 ( ( OD420nm 1.75 3 OD 1 1 1 550nm ) 3 OD600nm ) ml min ( Miller 1972 ) . 
TABLE 1 
Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study 
Strain 
Genotype 
Source 
S. Typhi STH2370 TYT2075 TYT2080 TYT1014 TYT1026 TYT1033 TYT1044 TYT3020 TYT3040 TYT3052 TYT2014 
Wild type STH2370 Dtsx 
Hospital Lucio Córdova Bucarey et al. ( 2005 ) Bucarey et al. ( 2005 ) This work This work This work This work This work Bucarey et al. ( 2005 ) This work This work 
STH2370 Dtsx/pSU19Ttsx STH2370 DimpX STH2370 Dtsx DimpX STH2370 DimpX / pETTimpX STH2370 Dtsx DimpX/pGEMTtsx-impX STH2370 DjajI STH2370 tsxTlacZY STH2370 impXTlacZY STH2370 impXT3xFLAG 
Plasmids 
Genotype 
Source 
pKD46 pCP20 
AmpR , Red recombinase expression plasmid AmpR , FLP recombinase expression plasmid CamR and KanR template plasmids 3xFLAG template plasmid KanR , FRTTlacZY plasmid 
K. Datsenko and B. W K. Datsenko and B. W K. Datsenko and B. W L. Bossi J. Slauch 
anner anner anner 
pKD4 and pKD3 pSU11 pCE36 
RNA isolation and reverse transcriptase -- PCR : To isolate RNA , cells were grown overnight in LB medium at 37 . 
Total RNA was extracted and puriﬁed using TRIzol and treated with RNase-free DNase I ( ampliﬁcation grade ; GIBCO-BRL , Gaithersburg , MD ) . 
Reverse transcription ( RT ) -- PCR was performed on 200 ng of DNase-treated RNA using Superscript II RT ( Invitrogen , San Diego ) . 
Ampliﬁcation was for 30 cycles ( 94 for 30 sec , 55 for 30 sec , and 72 for 2 min , followed by a 7-min extension at 72 ) . 
Primers jajI TAGAATTCTACGGG CAAATTCAGGGCACTA , impX CCGGATCCGGAAAGAGAA AACCCCCGCACA , tsx2 CCGGATCCAATCCAATCGCCGTCG CCCCAGTTCAG , and tsx1 CCGGTACCCAAAGCCAGCCGC CAGAGCACA , corresponding to internal regions of the S. Typhi jajI , impX , and tsx genes , were designed on the basis of the S. Typhi strain CT18 genome sequence ( Parkhill et al. 2001 ) . 
Genomic DNA served as a positive control , and DNasetreated RNA that had not been reverse transcribed was used as a negative control . 
Twenty-microliter aliquots removed after 30 cycles of ampliﬁcation were resolved in 1 % agarose gels with ethidium bromide , and gels were analyzed using a Digital Science 120 system ( Kodak ) . 
Uptake and efﬂux assays : For the measurements of [ 3H ] thymidine ( 85 Ci/mmol , Perkin-Elmer , Norwalk , CT ) uptake and efﬂux , bacterial cultures of strain S. Typhi STH2370 and its mutant derivatives were grown in LB medium to an OD600nm of 0.2 or to overnight density , and cells were harvested by centrifugation and washed twice with M9 glycerol medium or 20 mm HEPES buffer ( pH 7 ) , respectively . 
To measure uptake , a mix of 1 mCi 3H-radiolabeled thymidine ( 0.01 nmol ) and cold thymidine ( 0.415 nmol ) was added to a 0.5-ml cell suspension to yield a ﬁnal concentration of 0.85 mm . 
Samples ( 100 ml ) were removed at various time intervals , ﬁltered through membrane ﬁlters ( ME 25 , 0.45 pm ; Schleicher & Schuell , Keene , NH ) , prewashed with M9 medium , and washed twice with 1 ml M9 medium . 
The radioactivity retained on the membrane ﬁlters was determined by scintillation counting . 
To measure efﬂux , cells were resuspended in 0.5 ml of 20 mm HEPES buffer ( pH 7 ) and a mix of 1 mCi 3H-radiolabeled thymidine ( 0.01 nmol ) and cold thymidine ( 0.415 nmol ) was added to a ﬁnal concentration of 0.85 mm . 
Carbonylcyanide-m-chlorophenylhydrazone ( CCCP ) was added to a ﬁnal concentration of 20 mm to dissipate the membrane potential , and cells were incubated for 15 min at 37 and aerated by shaking . 
Cells were then washed twice and resuspended in a 900-ml buffer at 4 . 
Efﬂux was initiated by the addition of sodium succinate to 0.1 m. Samples ( 100 ml ) were removed at various time intervals and ﬁltered . 
Radioactivity present in the supernatants was determined by scintillation counting . 
Efﬂux was expressed as the counts per minute released to the supernatant , divided by the counts per minute retained on the membrane ﬁlters . 
RESULTS
The loss of impX function suppresses the induced auxotrophy caused by a tsx mutation : We and others have found that the nucleoside-speciﬁc porin , Tsx , made by a subset of enteric gram-negative pathogens including S. Typhimurium and E. coli , is dispensable for growth in minimal media ( Nieweg and Bremer 1997 ) . 
In contrast , in three independent isolates of S. Typhi , a Dtsx nonpolar mutation confers an auxotrophic requirement for the nucleosides adenosine or thymidine ( Bucarey et al. 2005 ) 
Genotype Adenosine Thymidine Inosine 
The auxotrophy resulting from the Dtsx mutation is unusual . 
Unlike mutations affecting the essential pu-rine and pyrimidine biosynthetic pathways of Salmonella enterica , the Dtsx mutation causes an auxotrophy that can be masked by the addition of nucleosides , but not their nucleotide counterparts , and that can be masked by the addition of either purine or pyrimidine nucleosides ( adenosine or thymidine ) and only by these speciﬁc nucleosides . 
To understand this unusual phenotype , we have taken a genetic approach , and have attempted to isolate second-site suppressors of a Dtsx mutation that restore prototrophic growth . 
During this search , we noted a small ORF ( STY0450 ) immediately downstream and adjacent to the S. Typhi tsx gene ( STY0451 ) . 
The gene corresponding to ORF STY0450 , hereafter referred to as impX , is predicted to encode a protein product 108 amino acids in length with a molecular mass of 12 kDa . 
This gene is unique to serovars of S. enterica . 
To determine the function of the S. Typhi impX gene , we constructed a mutant derivative of S. Typhi strain STH2370 with a DimpX mutation , using the method of Datsenko and Wanner ( 2000 ) , and determined its phenotype . 
As shown in Table 2 , the DimpX mutant is a prototroph ; however , the deletion of the S. Typhi impX gene also results in an inability to grow in the presence of higher concentrations of adenosine ( or inosine ) and thymidine . 
For comparison , a deletion of the gene upstream of tsx ( jajI ) confers a wild-type phenotype ( our unpublished results ) . 
Moreover , unlike a Dtsx mutant , which is an auxo-troph that requires either adenosine or thymidine for growth in minimal medium , a DimpX Dtsx double mutant is a prototroph whose growth is sensitive to aden-osine or thymidine . 
Clearly , the Dtsx mutation does not have a polar effect on the expression of the impX gene , because the phenotype of the double mutants is different from that of the Dtsx single mutant . 
Rather , the DimpX mutation is epistatic to the Dtsx mutation and suppresses the auxotrophy caused by the Dtsx mutation ( Figure 1 ) . 
Formally , these genetic results suggest that the products of the impX and tsx genes participate in the same pathway in which the activity of ImpX precedes that of Tsx ; however , we show below that this is not the case . 
Previously , we have shown that complementation of an S. Typhi Dtsx mutant with a derivative of the moderate-copy-number plasmid pSU19 carrying the cloned tsx gene yields a strain that is prototrophic , yet can not grow in the presence of high concentrations of adenoside or thymidine , suggesting that overproduction of the Tsx porin results in an imbalance of membrane proteins that renders S. Typhi sensitive to adenosine or thymidine ( Bucarey et al. 2005 ) . 
This is the same phenotype exhibited by the S. Typhi DimpX mutant . 
In addition , expression of impX from a high-copy-number plasmid complements the adenosine or thymidine sensitivity of a DimpX mutant only partially . 
In contrast , we ﬁnd that the high-copy-number plasmid vector pGEM-T carrying an insert of the entire tsx impX operon with its promoter complements a Dtsx DimpX double mutant completely and restores both prototrophy and the ability to grow in the presence of high concentrations of adenosine or thymidine ( our unpublished results ) . 
Taken together , these results suggest that the balance of Tsx and ImpX products is implicated in both the prototrophic growth of S. Typhi in the absence of adenosine or thymidine and the growth of S. Typhi in the presence of high concentrations of aden-osine or thymidine . 
The S. Typhi tsx and impX genes are cotranscribed : As illustrated in Figure 2 , the tsx and impX genes are transcribed in the same direction and are separated by 53 bp of noncoding sequence . 
These genes lie 299 bp downstream of an open reading frame designated jajI ( STY0452 ) , which is also transcribed in the same direction and is separated by 252 bp from the potential ORF STY0449 , which is divergently transcribed . 
To determine whether the tsx and impX genes are part of the same transcription unit , we isolated RNA from wild-type S. Typhi cells and prepared cDNA templates using the primers tsx2 and impX1 , internal to the tsx and impX genes , respectively . 
These templates were ampli-ﬁed with pairs of primers corresponding to the jajI , tsx , and impX coding sequences . 
As shown in Figure 2 primer pairs internal to the jajI and tsx genes or the jajI and impX genes do not yield PCR products with either cDNA template , suggesting that the jajI transcript does not include the tsx or impX genes . 
In contrast , both cDNA templates yield products when ampliﬁed with a primer pair internal to the tsx gene . 
In addition , the cDNA template made by reverse transcription with the primer internal to impX yields a product when ampliﬁed with a pair of primers internal to tsx and impX . 
These results show that the tsx and impX genes are cotranscribed . 
Transcription of the tsx and impX genes is induced in the presence of adenosine : To support the conclusion that the tsx and impX genes are cotranscribed , we made two additional experiments . 
First , we asked whether transcription of the tsx and impX genes is subject to a common mechanism of regulatory control by intracellular nucleosides . 
Expression of the E. coli tsx gene is controlled by two differentially regulated promoters . 
One promoter is regulated negatively by the DeoR repressor , and the other is regulated negatively by the CytR repressor and positively by the cAMP/CRP complex ( Bremer et al. 1988 ; Gerlach et al. 1990 ) . 
Repression by DeoR and CytR is relieved by adenosine or cytidine ( Valentin-Hansen et al. 1978 ) ; these nucleosides are inducers of the tsx gene . 
The operators recognized by DeoR and CytR are present in the sequence of the S. Typhi tsx promoter , and the deoR and cytR genes are conserved in the S. Typhi genome sequence ( Parkhill et al. 2001 ) . 
To ask whether transcription of the tsx and impX genes is regulated by adenosine in S. Typhi , we constructed transcriptional fusions of the tsx and impX genes to the lacZY genes in single copy on the S. Typhi genome , using FLP-mediated site-speciﬁc recombination . 
Plasmid pCE36 was integrated at the site of the FLP scar in Dtsx and DimpX strains of S. Typhi to generate these fusions ( Ellermeier et al. 2002 ) . 
As shown in Figure 3 , the b-galactosidase activity produced by the recombinant S. Typhi impXT lacZY strain in presence of 2 mm adenosine is about twofold higher than that in the absence of adenosine . 
The b-galactosidase activity produced by a recombinant S. Typhi tsxTlacZY strain also increases by a similar amount in response to adenosine induction . 
Second , we constructed a mutant derivative of S. Typhi carrying a fusion of the coding sequence for a threefold repeated FLAG epitope to the 39-end of the impX coding sequence ( Uzzau et al. 2001 ) . 
This insertion mutant has a wild-type phenotype ( our unpublished results ) , showing that the C terminus of the ImpX protein is not essential for function . 
To conﬁrm the result that the expression of the impX gene is induced by the presence of adenosine , we grew the impXT3xFLAG mutant in the presence of various concentrations of adenosine , resuspended pelleted cells in sample buffer with SDS , and resolved the proteins in cells by SDS -- PAGE . 
Proteins in gels were transferred to PDVF membranes and the presence of the fusion protein was detected by Western blot analysis , as described in materials and methods . 
Immunoblot analysis shows that this mutant produces a protein with an apparent molecular mass of 14 kDa that binds anti-FLAG monoclonal antibody . 
This analysis also shows that the steady-state level of the ImpX -- 3xFLAG protein increases in response to increasing concentrations of adenosine ( Figure 4 ) . 
The ImpX protein is associated with the inner membrane : In our previous search for suppressors of the induced auxotrophy caused by a Dtsx mutation , we encountered a second-site revertant with an insertion of the mini-Tn10 transposon derivative , T-POP ( Rappleye and Roth 1997 ) , upstream of the S. Typhi pyrD gene . 
The pyrD gene encodes a dehydrogenase , the only membrane-associated protein required for de novo nucleoside biosynthesis ( Hansen et al. 2004 ) . 
This T-POP insertion suppresses the auxotrophy caused by a Dtsx mutation presumably by lowering the amount of PyrD protein product relative to that of Tsx ( Bucarey et al. 2005 ) . 
PyrD is an unusual membrane protein , because , like ImpX , it is predicted to have only two transmembrane a-helices ( Hansen et al. 2004 ) . 
Because our genetic evidence suggests that , like PyrD , ImpX may interact with Tsx , we determined the subcellular localization of the ImpX protein . 
As shown in Figure 5 , when proteins made by the impXT3xFLAG mutant are fractionated , ImpX -- 3xFLAG protein is found associated with the inner membrane fraction . 
A DimpX mutation suppresses the defect in nucleoside uptake caused by a Dtsx mutation and is defective in nucleoside export : A deletion of the S. Typhi impX gene suppresses the auxotrophy resulting from a Dtsx mutation ( Figure 2 ) . 
In E. coli , a null mutation in the tsx gene results in a complete defect in the uptake of both adenosine and thymidine when these nucleosides are present at low ( micromolars to millimolars ) extracellular concentrations ( Fsihi et al. 1993 ) . 
To determine the effects of the Dtsx and DimpX mutations on nucleoside uptake , we measured the initial rates of [ 3H ] thymidine uptake by wild-type and mutant strains of S. Typhi . 
As shown in Figure 6 , unlike the case of E. coli in which a Dtsx mutation results in a complete defect in thymidine uptake under similar conditions , an S. Typhi Dtsx mutation results in only a partial defect in the initial rate of thymidine uptake ; mutant cells uptake thymidine at a rate approximately half that of the wild type . 
From this result , we can conclude that S. Typhi has other outer membrane proteins in addition to the Tsx porin that facilitates the import of thymidine across the outer membrane . 
Thus , unlike the case for E. coli , thymidine uptake in S. Typhi is mediated by multiple porins . 
Surprisingly , the DimpX mutant uptakes thymidine at a greater initial rate than the wild type , as does the DimpX Dtsx double mutant . 
Again , we ﬁnd that the DimpX mutation is epistatic to the Dtsx mutation with respect to thymidine uptake , reinforcing the idea that the Tsx channel is not the only mechanism by which thymidine can enter S. Typhi and arguing that ImpX either inhibits the uptake of thymidine or facilitates the competing export of thymidine . 
To distinguish between these alternatives , we measured the initial rates of thymidine efﬂux from wild-type and mutant cells . 
Cells were loaded with [ 3H ] thymidine in the presence of the uncoupling agent , CCCP , and washed to remove extracellular thymidine . 
Export was reactivated by the addition of succinate to regenerate the proton motive force due to respiratory electron transport , and the initial rates of thymidine efﬂux were determined by measuring the rates of release of radioactive thymidine from the loaded cells into the supernatants of cell suspensions . 
As shown in Figure 6 , wild-type cells have a mechanism that results in the efﬂux of thymidine that is dependent on the proton gradient . 
The Dtsx mutant shows a somewhat higher rate of thymidine efﬂux than the wild type . 
This result is consistent with the idea that Tsx facilitates the directional transport of extracellular thymidine across the outer membrane and into the periplasm . 
In contrast , the DimpX single mutant shows a lower rate of efﬂux than does the wild type , implicating the product of the impX gene directly in thymidine efﬂux . 
The DimpX Dtsx double mutant resembles the wild-type strain in its initial rate of thymidine efﬂux . 
TABLE 2 
A DimpX mutation confers sensitivity to high concentrations of speciﬁc nucleosides and suppresses the auxotrophy resulting from a Dtsx mutation 
Uridine 
Guanosine 
Cytocine 
None 
Wild type DimpX 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 3 10 4 4 3 10 5 1 
3 3 10 4 3 3 10 5 1 
2 3 10 4 4 3 10 5 5 3 10 7 
1 1 
1 1 
1 1 
1 1 
Dtsx DimpX Dtsx 
5 3 10 7 
5 3 10 7 
5 3 10 7 
5 3 10 7 
Overnight cultures of each strain grown aerobically in LB medium at 37 were pelleted , washed twice with PBS , diluted serially in PBS , and spread on M9-glucose plates supplemented with adenosine , thymidine , guanosine , cytosine , inosine , or uridine to ﬁnal concentrations of 0.5 mm . 
Colony-forming units were determined after incubation for 48 hr at 37 . 
Efﬁciencies of plating were expressed as the titers of each strain divided by the titer of the wild type . 
Figure 1 . 
-- An S. Typhi DimpX mutation is epistatic 
to a Dtsx mutation . 
S. Typhi strains STH2370 and their otherwise isogenic DimpX , Dtsx , and DimpX Dtsx mutant derivatives were grown to overnight density in LB medium and diluted 1:100 in PBS . 
Aliquots ( 200 ml ) of the dilutions were spread on minimal plates , and sterile ﬁlter paper disks with 20 ml of 0.1 m adenosine were placed in the center of each plate . 
Plates were incubated to 37 for 48 hr . 
The ﬁgure shows that , whereas a Dtsx mutant requires adenosine for growth , a DimpX Dtsx mutant does not and has a phenotype more similar to that of a DimpX mutant . 
Figure 2 . 
-- The tsx and impX genes are cotranscribed . 
( Bottom ) The locations of the primers used to prepare and amplify cDNA . 
Primers impX and tsx2 ( underlined ) were used to prepare cDNA corresponding to a portion of the tsx -- impX transcript prepared from total RNA . 
PCR products were subsequently ampliﬁed using primer pairs ( tsx1 1 tsx2 ) , ( jajI 1 impX ) , ( tsx1 1 impX ) , and ( jajI 1 tsx2 ) . 
The right-most lane shows the products of ampliﬁcation of RNA prior to treatment with reverse transcriptase . 
Figure 3 . 
-- The transcription of the tsx and impX genes is induced by the presence of adenosine . 
Data are the average values of b-galactosidase activities expressed in Miller units ( Miller 1972 ) obtained from one representative experiment performed in triplicate . 
Similar results were obtained from two additional , independent experiments . 
Figure 4 . 
-- Steady-state levels of the ImpX -- 3xFLAG hybrid protein increase in response to increasing concentrations of adenosine . 
The S. Typhi impXT3xFLAG mutant was grown to overnight density in LB medium in the absence and presence ( 1.6 mm ) of adenosine , cells were concentrated by centrifugation and resuspended in sample buffer with SDS , and proteins were resolved by SDS -- PAGE . 
Proteins in gels were transferred to PDVF membranes , and the presence of the fusion protein was detected by Western blot analysis , as described in materials and methods 
Figure 5 . 
-- The ImpX protein tagged with the 3xFLAG epitope is associated with the S. Typhi inner membrane . 
Subcellular fractions enriched for proteins in the inner membrane ( IMF ) and outer membrane ( OMF ) were separated by SDS -- PAGE and transferred to PDVF membranes . 
( Bottom ) The presence or absence of the fusion protein in inner ( lanes 1 and 2 ) and outer ( lanes 3 and 4 ) membrane fractions was detected by Western blot analysis as described in materials and methods . 
( Top ) The typical pattern of abundant outer membrane proteins made by S. Typhi ( lanes 3 and 4 ) ( Lobos and Mora 1991 ) is not observed for the inner membrane fraction ( lanes 1 and 2 ) . 
DISCUSSION
In E. coli , the Tsx porin is essential for the uptake of nucleosides and deoxynucleosides at low ( less than millimolar ) substrate concentrations ( Fsihi et al. 1993 ) . 
The rate of uptake of adenosine and thymidine is strongly reduced in the absence of the Tsx porin , whereas that of cytidine and guanosine remains unchanged ( Munch-Petersen et al. 1979 ; Benz et al. 1988 ; Maier et al. 1988 ) . 
Tsx does not play a role in the transport of free nucleobases or monophosphate nucleosides ( McKeown et al. 1976 ; Van Alphen et al. 1978 ; Benz et al. 1988 ) . 
In addition to its role as a nucleoside-speciﬁc channel , the E. coli Tsx protein functions as a receptor for a number of bacteriophages and colicin K ( Hantke 1976 ; Nieweg and Bremer 1997 ; Nikaido 2003 ) . 
Tsx also transports albicidin , a potent inhibitor of prokaryotic DNA replication produced by Xanthomonas albilineans ( Birch and Patil 1985 ; Birch et al. 1990 ; Nieweg and Bremer 1997 ) . 
To understand the mechanism of Tsx-mediated transport across the bacterial outer membrane , crystal structures of Tsx have been determined alone and with different bound nucleosides . 
Tsx forms a monomeric b-barrel consisting of 12 b-strands with a long , narrow central pore . 
The structures of Tsx in a complex with nucleosides reveal several distinct substrate-binding sites and suggest a `` sequential binding '' mechanism for the transport of nucleosides across the outer membrane ( Ye and van den Berg 2004 ) . 
Previously , we found that a deletion of the S. Typhi tsx gene confers an auxotrophic requirement fo adenosine or thymidine . 
Prototrophy can be restored by the complementation of a Dtsx mutant with an intermediate-copy-number plasmid carrying the tsx gene , but the complemented strain acquires sensitivity to these nucleosides , presumably as a consequence of the overexpression of tsx . 
To understand these unusual phenotypes , we have isolated revertants of an S. Typhi Dtsx mutant that can grow in minimal medium . 
One of these revertants carries an insertion that places the pyrD gene under the control of the tetracycline-inducible tetA promoter from transposon T-POP . 
This revertant grows in minimal medium only in the presence of intermediate concentrations of tetracycline , suggesting that the balance of products of the tsx and pyrD genes , an outer membrane porin and an inner-membrane-associated dehydrogenase , is essential for the growth of S. Typhi ( Bucarey et al. 2005 ) . 
In this article , we have extended our search for suppressors of the induced auxotrophy resulting from a Dtsx nonpolar mutation and have found that mutations in the cotranscribed and coregulated gene , immediately downstream of tsx , impX , can suppress this auxotrophy . 
The impX gene , like pyrD , is predicted to encode an inner membrane protein with only two transmembrane a-helices , similar in size to that of the small multidrug resistance ( SMR ) proteins . 
This smallest family of membrane proteins has members that range in size from 100 to 120 aminoacyl residues and participate in the efﬂux of a wide variety of antibiotics ( Grinius et al. 1992 ; Grinius and Goldberg 1994 ) . 
These proteins function as homo - or hetero-oligomers , but unlike ImpX , have four transmembrane a-helices . 
Indeed , ImpX shares no sequence similarity with proteins of the SMR family , nor with larger multidrug resistance proteins or other membrane transporters , and represents the ﬁrst member of a new class of inner membrane exporters . 
Our genetic evidence argues strongly that the Tsx outer membrane protein and ImpX inner membrane protein act in opposition to maintain a balance of nucleoside transport . 
Not only does an DimpX mutation suppress a Dtsx mutation , but also it confers the same phenotype , sensitivity to a speciﬁc subset of nucleosides ( the preferred substrates of Tsx ) , which results from the overexpression of the tsx gene . 
These results argue that the balance of products of the tsx and impX genes is critical for nucleoside transport in S. Typhi . 
However , nucleoside import and export in S. Typhi must involve both outer and inner membrane protein in addition to Tsx and ImpX , respectively . 
The ﬁndings that the Dtsx mutant is only partially defective in thymidine import reveals that S. Typhi has another porin involved in nucleoside import . 
Similarly , the DimpX mutant is only partially defective in thymidine export . 
Because the inner membrane is impermeable to thymidine , this result reveals that there is another , impX-independent , energy-dependent thymidine efﬂux system . 
The simplest model to explain our result is that the Tsx channel and other porins facilitate the import of nucleosides to the periplasm , and additional inner membrane transporters , including those encoded by the nupC , nupG , and potentially other S. Typhi genes , complete the import process . 
In addition , there is a competing export pathway that involves the principal ImpX and another inner membrane transporter and potentially as-yet-unknown outer membrane proteins . 
Thus , both DimpX and DimpX Dtsx mutants show a higher rate of nucleoside import , because the majo route of competing nucleoside export is blocked by the DimpX mutation . 
The Dtsx mutant likely has a higher rate of nucleoside efﬂux , because Tsx-mediated nucleoside import in this mutant can not counter the effects of ImpX-mediated export . 
Both the DimpX mutant and mutants that overproduce Tsx are sensitive to high concentrations of nucleosides , presumably because they accumulate levels of these metabolites sufﬁcient to inhibit cell growth . 
The Dtsx mutant is an auxotroph , presumably because the combination of the alternative uptake system and a functional ImpX-dependent efﬂux system in the absence of Tsx does not permit the accumulation of intracellular levels of nucleosides sufﬁcient for growth . 
Our results are of particular importance to our understanding of epistatic interactions . 
Normally , the result that one loss-of-function mutation ( for example , DimpX ) is epistatic to another loss-of-function mutation ( for example , Dtsx ) is taken as a strong indication that the product of the ﬁrst gene acts before that of the second gene in the same pathway . 
In the case of the impX and tsx genes , it is clear that their products act in opposing pathways involving redundant functions to maintain a balance of the concentrations of their substrates . 
It is likely that other examples of this type of epistasis will be encountered upon the genetic analysis of other transport mechanisms , as well as of competing pathways involving multiple , redundant functions in general . 
Figure 6 . 
-- Uptake and efﬂux of 3H-radiolabeled thymidine by S. Typhi . 
( Top ) The initial rates of uptake of [ 3H ] thy-midine by S. Typhi wild-type or mutant cells was measured at a substrate concentration of 0.85 mm thymidine . 
Data shown represent the means of the values obtained from two separate experiments in which duplicate samples were taken at each time point . 
( Bottom ) Efﬂux was initiated by the addition of 0.1 m sodium succinate to cells loaded with [ 3H ] thymidine in the presence of CCCP . 
Efﬂux was expressed as the counts per minute released to the supernatant at various times after initiation , divided by the counts per minute retained on the membrane ﬁlters . 
Data shown represent the means of the results from two separate experiments in which duplicate samples were taken at each time point . 
We thank Phil Youderian for his helpful assistance in the preparation of this manuscript . 
This work was supported by Fondo Nacional de Desarrollo Cientıﬁco y Tecnológico ( Chile ) grant 1020485 to G.C.M. S.B. was supported by fellowships from Programa de Mejor-amiento de la Equidad y Calidad de la Educación Superior and Dirección General de Postgrado e Investigación , Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile . 
LITERATURE CITED 
Acimovic , Y. , and I. R. Coe , 2002 Molecular evolution of the equilibrative nucleoside transporter family : identiﬁcation of novel family members in prokaryotes and eukaryotes . 
Mol . 
Biol . 
Evol . 
19 : 2199 -- 2210 . 
Bauer , A. W. , W. M. M. Kirby , J. C. Sherris and M. Turck , 1966 Antibiotic susceptibility testing by a standardized single disk method . 
Am . 
J. Clin . 
Pathol . 
45 : 493 -- 496 . 
Benson , S. A. , and A. Decloux , 1985 Isolation and characterization of outer membrane permeability mutants in Escherichia coli K-12 . 
J. Bacteriol . 
161 : 361 -- 367 . 
Benz , R. , A. Schmid , C. Maier and E. Bremer , 1988 Characterization of the nucleoside-binding site inside the Tsx channel of Escherichia coli outer membrane . 
Reconstitution experiments with lipid bilayer membranes . 
Eur . 
J. Biochem . 
176 : 699 -- 705 . 
Birch , R. G. , and S. S. Patil , 1985 Preliminary characterization of an antibiotic produced by Xanthomonas albilineans which inhibits DNA synthesis in Escherichia coli . 
J. Gen. Microbiol . 
131 ( Pt . 
5 ) : 1069 -- 1075 . 
Birch , R. G. , J. M. Pemberton and W. V. Basnayake , 1990 Stable albicidin resistance in Escherichia coli involves an altered outermembrane nucleoside uptake system . 
J. Gen. Microbiol . 
136 ( Pt . 
1 ) : 51 -- 58 . 
Bremer , E. , P. Gerlach and A. Middendorf , 1988 Double negative and positive control of tsx expression in Escherichia coli . 
J. Bacteriol . 
170 : 108 -- 116 . 
Bucarey , S. A. , N. A. Villagra , M. P. Martinic , A. N. Trombert , C. A. Santiviago et al. , 2005 The Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi tsx gene , encoding a nucleoside-speciﬁc porin , is essential for prototrophic growth in the absence of nucleosides . 
Infect . 
Immun . 
73 ( 10 ) : 6210 -- 6219 . 
Craig , J. E. , Y. Zhang and M. P. Gallagher , 1994 Cloning of the nupC gene of Escherichia coli encoding a nucleoside transport system , and identiﬁcation of an adjacent insertion element , IS 186 . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
11 : 1159 -- 1168 . 
Datsenko , K. A. , and B. L. Wanner , 2000 One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in Escherichia coli K-12 using PCR products . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 97 : 6640 -- 6645 . 
Ellermeier , C. D. , A. Janakiraman and J. M. Slauch , 2002 Construction of targeted single copy lac fusions using lambda red and FLP-mediated site-speciﬁc recombination in bacteria . 
Gene 290 : 153 -- 161 . 
Fsihi , H. , B. Kottwitz and E. Bremer , 1993 Single amino acid substitutions affecting the substrate speciﬁcity of the Escherichia coli K-12 nucleoside-speciﬁc Tsx channel . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
268 : 17495 -- 17503 . 
Gerlach , P. , P. Valentin-Hansen and E. Bremer , 1990 Transcriptional regulation of the cytR repressor gene of Escherichia coli : autoregulation and positive control by the cAMP/CAP complex . 
Mol . 
Microbiol . 
4 : 479 -- 488 . 
Grinius , L. L , and E. B. Goldberg , 1994 Bacterial multidrug resistance is due to a single membrane protein which functions as a drug pump . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
269 ( 47 ) : 29998 -- 30004 . 
Grinius , L. , G. Dreguniene , E. B. Goldberg , C. H. Liao and S. J. Projan , 1992 A staphylococcal multidrug resistance gene product is a member of a new protein family . 
Plasmid 27 ( 2 ) : 119 -- 129 . 
Hansen , M. , J. Le Nours , E. Johansson , T. Antal , A. Ullrich et al. , 2004 Inhibitor binding in a class 2 dihydroorotate dehydrogenase causes variations in the membrane-associated N-terminal domain . 
Protein Sci . 
13 ( 4 ) : 1031 -- 1042 . 
Hantke , K. , 1976 Phage T6-colicin K receptor and nucleoside transport in Escherichia coli . 
FEBS Lett . 
70 : 109 -- 112 . 
Hardesty , C. , C. Ferran and J. M. DiRienzo , 1991 Plasmid-mediated sucrose metabolism in Escherichia coli : characterization of scrY , the structural gene for a phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent sucrose phosphotransferase system outer membrane porin . 
J. Bacteriol . 
173 : 449 -- 456 . 
Lobos , S. R. , and G. C. Mora , 1991 Alteration in the electropho-retic mobility of OmpC due to variations in the ammonium persulfate concentration in sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis . 
Electrophoresis 12 : 448 -- 450 . 
Luckey , M. , and H. Nikaido , 1980 Speciﬁcity of diffusion channels produced by lambda phage receptor protein of Escherichia coli . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 77 : 167 -- 171 . 
Maier , C. , E. Bremer , A. Schmid and R. Benz , 1988 Pore-forming activity of the Tsx protein from the outer membrane of Escherichia coli . 
Demonstration of a nucleoside-speciﬁc binding site . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
263 : 2493 -- 2499 . 
McKeown , M. , M. Kahn and P. Hanawalt , 1976 Thymidine uptake and utilization in Escherichia coli : a new gene controlling nucleoside transport . 
J. Bacteriol . 
126 : 814 -- 822 . 
Miller , J. H. , 1972 Experiments in Molecular Genetics . 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Harbor , NY . 
Munch-Petersen , A. , and N. Jensen , 1990 Analysis of the regulatory region of the Escherichia coli nupG gene , encoding a nucleosidetransport protein . 
Eur . 
J. Biochem . 
190 : 547 -- 551 . 
Munch-Petersen , A. , B. Mygind , A. Nicolaisen and N. J. Pihl , 1979 Nucleoside transport in cells and membrane vesicles from Escherichia coli K12 . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
254 : 3730 -- 3737 . 
Nieweg , A. , and E. Bremer , 1997 The nucleoside-speciﬁc Tsx channel from the outer membrane of Salmonella typhimurium , Klebsiella pneumoniae and Enterobacter aerogenes : functional characterization and DNA sequence analysis of the tsx genes . 
Microbiology 143 : 603 -- 615 . 
Nikaido , H. , 1994 Porins and speciﬁc diffusion channels in bacterial outer membranes . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
269 : 3905 -- 3908 . 
Nikaido , H. , 2003 Molecular basis of bacterial outer membrane permeability revisited . 
Microbiol . 
Mol . 
Biol . 
67 : 593 -- 656 . 
Norholm , M. H. , and G. Dandanell , 2001 Speciﬁcity and topology of the Escherichia coli xanthosine permease , a representativ 
of the NHS subfamily of the major facilitator superfamily . 
J. Bacteriol . 
183 : 4900 -- 4904 . 
Parkhill , J. , G. Dougan , K. D. James , N. R. Thomson , D. Pickard et al. , 2001 Complete genome sequence of a multiple drug resistant Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi CT18 . 
Nature 413 : 848 -- 852 . 
Rappleye , C. A. , and J. R. Roth , 1997 A Tn10 derivative ( T-POP ) for isolation of insertions with conditional ( tetracycline-dependent ) phenotypes . 
J. Bacteriol . 
179 : 5827 -- 5834 . 
Schnaitman , C. A , 1971 Solubilization of the cytoplasmic membrane of Escherichia coli by Triton X-100 . 
J. Bacteriol . 
108 : 545 -- 552 . 
Toro , C. S. , G. C. Mora and N. Figueroa-Bossi , 1998 Gene transfer between related bacteria by electrotransformation : mapping Sal-monella typhi genes in Salmonella typhimurium . 
J. Bacteriol . 
180 : 4750 -- 4752 . 
Trias , J. , and H. Nikaido , 1990 Protein D2 channel of the Pseudo-monas aeruginosa outer membrane has a binding site for basic amino acids and peptides . 
J. Biol . 
Chem . 
265 : 15680 -- 15684 . 
Trias , J. , E. Y. Rosenberg and H. Nikaido , 1988 Speciﬁcity of the glucose channel formed by protein D1 of Pseudomonas aeruginosa . 
Biochim . 
Biophys . 
Acta 938 : 493 -- 496 . 
Uzzau , S. , N. Figueroa-Bossi , S. Rubino and L. Bossi , 2001 Epitope tagging of chromosomal genes in Salmonella . 
Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
USA 98 : 15264 -- 15269 . 
Valentin-Hansen , P. , B. A. Svenningsen , A. Munch-Petersen and K. Hammer-Jespersen , 1978 Regulation of the deo operon in Escherichia coli : the double negative control of the deo operon by the cytR and deoR repressors in a DNA directed in vitro system . 
Mol . 
Gen. Genet . 
159 ( 2 ) : 191 -- 202 . 
van Alphen , W. , N. van Seim and B. Lugtenberg , 1978 Pores in the outer membrane of Escherichia coli K12 : involvement of proteins b and e in the functioning of pores for nucleotides . 
Mol . 
Gen. Genet . 
159 : 75 -- 83 . 
Westh Hansen , S. E. , N. Jensen and A. Munch-Petersen , 1987 Studies on the sequence and structure of the Escherichia coli K-12 nupG gene , encoding a nucleoside-transport system . 
Eur . 
J. Biochem . 
168 : 385 -- 391 . 
Ye , J. , and B. van den Berg , 2004 Crystal structure of the bacterial nucleoside transporter Tsx . 
EMBO J. 23 ( 16 ) : 3187 -- 3195 .