MICROBIOLOGY LETTERS
R E S E A R C H L E T T E R 
Global transcriptional response of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi to anti-z66 antiserum 
Haifang Zhang , Xiumei Sheng , Shungao Xu , Yulin Gao , Hong Du , Junrong Li , Huaxi Xu & Xinxiang Huang 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , School of Medical Technology , Jiangsu University , Jiangsu , China 
Abstract expression levels of 187 genes were altered by more than threefold compared with the same strain treated with control serum . 
The microarray expression patterns of representative genes were validated by reverse transcriptase-PCR . 
Importantly , no signiﬁcant changes in gene expression were observed in the ﬂjB : z66 deletion mutant that was similarly treated with the anti-z66 antiserum . 
To the best of our knowledge , this is the ﬁrst study to show the global transcriptional response of Salmonella to antiﬂagellin antiserum . 
Correspondence : Xinxiang Huang , 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Recent studies have shown that ﬂagella may modulate physiological processes by sensing environmental changes in temperature and moisture . 
When the z66 1 strain of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi ( S. Typhi ) was exposed to an antiserum against the z66 ﬂagellar antigen , the ﬂjBA operon was deleted from a linear plasmid , leading to the unidirectional ﬂagellar phase variation from FljB to FliC . 
We hypothesized that ﬂagella may serve as a sensor that responded to the antiserum by altering gene expression and triggering the unidirectional ﬂagellar phase variation . 
To test this hypothesis , Salmonella genomic DNA microarrays were used to determine the gene expression proﬁle of the z66 wild-type strain of 1 S. Typhi treated with the anti-z66 antiserum for 30 min . 
The results showed that 
Biology , School of Medical Technology , Jiangsu University , Zhenjiang , Jiangsu , 
212013 , China . 
Tel. : 186 511 85 03 84 01 ; fax : 186 511 85 01 25 44 ; e-mail : 
huxinx@yahoo.com.hk 
Received 17 January 2009 ; accepted 10 June 2009 . 
Final version published online 14 July 2009 . 
DOI :10.1111 / j.1574-6968 .2009.01692 . 
x 
Editor : Reggie Lo 
Keywords 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi ; ﬂagellum ; 
z66 antigen ; gene expression regulation . 
Introduction
Flagella play an important role in Salmonella motility . 
More than 2300 serovars of Salmonella enterica have been identi-ﬁed on the basis of their ﬂagella ( H antigen ) and lipopoly-saccharide ( O antigen ) ( Ewing , 1986 ) . 
Most S. enterica serovars are biphasic because they possess two ﬂagellin genes , ﬂiC and ﬂjB , located at different chromosomal loci . 
They alternately express these two genes through a process called ` phase variation , ' which is mediated by the recombinase Hin , whose gene is located upstream of the ﬂjBA operon . 
The ﬂjA gene is cotranscribed with ﬂjB and encodes an inhibitor of ﬂiC expression ( Yamamoto & Kutsukake , 2006 ) . 
Therefore , only one of the two ﬂagellin genes is expressed at any given time . 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi ( S. Typhi ) is the patho-gen responsible for typhoid fever in humans . 
It was once considered a monophasic strain because it carries only the ﬂiC gene encoding either the full-length H :d antigen or the truncated H : j antigen ( Frankel et al. , 1989 ) . 
However , 
Guinee et al. ( 1981 ) discovered a new ﬂagellar antigen in S. Typhi strains collected from Indonesia and named it z66 . 
Subsequently , the z66 strain was shown to undergo ﬂagel-1 lar phase variation from z66 to d/j antigen after induction by an anti-z66 antiserum , while the d/j-positive strains did not revert to z66 upon treatment with an anti-d/j antiserum ( Tamura et al. , 1988 ) . 
We previously cloned the gene encoding H : z66 from z66-positive strains and found a gene cluster similar to the ﬂjBA operon in other biphasic S. enterica serovars , but divergent in the upstream region from the hin locus in a typical ﬂjBA operon ( Huang et al. , 2004 ) . 
Recently , Baker et al. ( 2007a , b ) demonstrated that the ﬂjBA gene cluster is located in a novel 27-kb linear plasmid named pBSSB1 , and the unidirectional ﬂagellar phase variation is caused by the deletion of a 2.7-kb terminal region containing the majority of the ﬂjBA gene cluster . 
However , the mechanism underlying the truncation is currently unknown . 
Recent experiments demonstrated that the ﬂagellum itself could be a sensor . 
For example , suboptimal external surface hydration was shown to interfere with secretion of ﬂagellin subunits and ﬁlament growth through ﬂagellar sensing of changes in environmental moisture ( Wang et al. , 2005 ) . 
Additionally , the ﬂagella of S. Typhi can sense shifts in environmental temperature , and modulate ﬂagella motility through conformational changes of the ﬂagellar switch component FliG ( Mashimo et al. , 2007 ) . 
In light of these ﬂagellar sensory functions , we hypothesized that the ﬂagella of S. Typhi may also serve as a sensor in response to the anti-z66 antibody to mediate the unidirectional ﬂagellar phase variation through a series of gene regulation events . 
Recently , we developed a Salmonella genomic microarray system based on the genomic information of the S. Typhi Ty2 strain ( Sheng et al. , 2009 ) . 
Taking advantage of this microarray tool , we analyzed gene expression proﬁles of the 1 z66 S. Typhi treated with anti-z66 antiserum for 30 min . 
This study ﬁrst revealed the global transcriptional response of Salmonella to antiﬂagellin antiserum . 
slide , all genes were analyzed as 12 replicates . 
Materials and methods
Bacterial cultures
The bacterial strain used in this study was S. Typhi GIFU10007 , a z66 antigen-positive wild-type strain ( Huang et al. , 2004 ) . 
The rabbit anti-z66 antiserum ( National Institute of Infectious Disease , Japan ) and nonimmune rabbit serum were incubated in water at 56 1C for 30 min to inactivate the complement of these sera , and then puriﬁed using the method of ammonium sulfate salting-out . 
The titer of the puriﬁed anti-z66 antiserum is 1 : 40 000 . 
Salmo-nella enterica serovar Typhi GIFU10007 were incubated in 1 mL Luria -- Bertani ( LB ) broth at 37 1C overnight , and 100 mL was inoculated into 60 mL LB and incubated at 37 1C with shaking for 4 h . 
The culture was divided into two , with one culture receiving the rabbit anti-z66 antiser-um at a 1 : 300 dilution and another receiving normal rabbit serum at the same dilution as the control . 
Incubation was continued for 30 min after addition of the anti-z66 antiser-um . 
AN ﬂjB : z66 deletion mutant ( Huang et al. , 2004 ) , which was a nonpolar mutation identiﬁed by relative DNA sequen-cing and was treated with the same anti-z66 antiserum as the 
control experiment . 
RNA extraction and cDNA probe preparation
Total RNAs were extracted using a Qiagen RNaeasy mini kit according to the manufacturer 's protocol and treated with RNAse-free DNAse I ( Takara ) to diminish the trace mixed DNA as described previously ( Xu et al. , 2008 ) . 
cDNAs were reverse transcribed from 20 mg of total RNAs using a SuperScript RT III ( Invitrogen ) kit and used for microarray probe preparation . 
Each cDNA sample was individually labeled with cy3 - and cy5-conjugated dCTP as described previously 
( Huang et al. , 2007 ; Sheng et al. , 2009 ) , in two separate reactions , with dye swapping . 
Labeled cDNAs were puriﬁed using a QIAquick puriﬁcation kit ( Qiagen ) according to the manufacturer 's instructions . 
Hybridization and scanning
The puriﬁed cDNA probes from two different treatments with different ﬂuorescent dye labels were paired and combined , and hybridization was performed as described previously ( Sheng et al. , 2009 ) . 
The slides were scanned with a GenePix Personal 4100A scanner ( Molecular Devices ) under two channels of the appropriate lasers . 
Each experiment was repeated independently three times , and hence three different pairs of total RNA samples were obtained , and six labeled cDNA probe pairs were generated by dye swapping . 
Because each gene was also duplicated on each microarray 
Data analysis
GENEPIX PRO6 .0 ( Molecular Devices ) was used to quantify the spot intensity . 
The densitometric values of the spots with DNA sequences representing ORFs were normalized with the average overall intensity of the slide by the global normalization mode . 
Data were exported into MICROSOFT EXCEL for subsequent analysis as described previously ( Sheng et al. , 2009 ) , with minor modiﬁcations . 
In brief , the ratio of ﬂuorescent intensities from two channels was ﬁrst calculated for each individual spot on each slide , and then the average intensity ratio of the same gene from different slides was subsequently derived to represent a mean value of difference in gene expression . 
This was expressed as log2 ( ratio ) and entered as one spot in the gene expression proﬁle plot view . 
Only genes that displayed at least eight valid values in the 12 replicate analyses were subjected to further analysis . 
The threshold log ratio for differential expression was set at 1.58 to represent greater than threefold changes in the expression levels . 
Reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR validation
RNA puriﬁcation and reverse transcription were performed as above . 
Gene-speciﬁc primers used for PCR are listed in Table 1 . 
For the reverse transcription , each 20-mL reaction contained 2 mg of total RNA and 10 nmol of speciﬁc reverse primers . 
One microliter of reverse transcription product was subjected to a quantitative PCR assay as described previously ( Xu et al. , 2008 ) . 
Each experiment was performed with four RNA samples obtained from four independent experiments . 
Results
Microarrays containing 4157 S. Typhi genes were subjected to genomic transcriptional proﬁling . 
Five hundred and four was upregulated by more than threefold . 
Blue circles correspond to genes whose expression was not signiﬁcantly altered . 
Yellow circles correspond to genes whose expression was downregulated by more than threefold . 
genes with a ﬂuorescent intensity below the 300 cut-off value on most of the slides were ﬁltered out and excluded from analysis . 
The overall expression proﬁle of the remaining 3653 genes in S. Typhi induced by the anti-z66 antiser-um for 30 min is shown in Fig. 1 . 
Analyses of triplicate experiments showed that 187 genes displayed signiﬁcant differential expression ( threefold or higher ) between the antiserum-induced and the noninduced ( normal rabbit serum ) samples . 
One hundred and twenty-two and 65 genes were up - and downregulated , respectively ( Supporting Information , Table S1 ) . 
While many have unknown functions , the remaining genes were categorized based on their known or putative functions . 
Many upregulated genes are involved in protein translation , and nucleic acid and ribosomal protein biosynthesis . 
In contrast to the largely anabolic functions of the upregulated genes , many downregulated genes are associated with catabolism of carbohydrates , amino acids and fatty acids . 
To verify the microarray results , expression levels of several representative genes including ﬁs , ﬂiC , rplB , purB , acs and poxB were also investigated by RT-PCR . 
As shown in Fig. 2 , there was signiﬁcant concordance between the RTPCR results and the microarray analysis . 
Taken together , these results indicate that upon induction with the anti-z66 antiserum , cells undergo broad regulation of gene expression to promote synthesis of nucleic acids and proteins and concurrently suppress the breakdown of the building blocks . 
To investigate whether such broad regulation requires ﬂagella , we next analyzed gene expression patterns of a ﬂjB : z66 deletion mutant treated in the same manner as the wild-type strain . 
Remarkably , we did not observe similar gene expression changes in this ﬂagella-free strain ( Fig. 3 ) , strongly suggesting that the observed gene expression regulation is ﬂagella dependent . 
Discussion
The ﬂagella of bacteria were traditionally considered only as the motility apparatus . 
In particular , the ﬂagella of Salmo-nella have been implicated previously in the invasion of host cells ( Jones et al. , 1992 ) . 
Conversely , the ﬂagellin subunit is an important target for pathogen recognition by the mammalian innate immune system through Toll-like receptor -5 ( Hayashi et al. , 2001 ) . 
Therefore , antibodies against ﬂagellin constitute an adverse environmental factor for bacteria . 
Given the sensory function of ﬂagella of Salmonella in response to temperature and moisture , we hypothesized that upon challenge by the antibody , the ﬂagellum of S. Typhi might have a sensory function in response to the antiﬂagellin antibody . 
In the current study , genomic transcriptional analysis showed that S. Typhi has a wide array of responses to the antiﬂagellin antibody stress at the gene transcription level . 
The results of selected quantitative RTPCR and the fact that many of the 187 genes with signiﬁcantly altered expression are units of operons and genes of the same operon tend to be coordinately regulated also validate our microarray data . 
Meanwhile , none of the similar signiﬁcant gene expression changes were found in the ﬂjB : z66 mutant treated with the antiﬂagellin antibody in the same manner as the wild-type strain . 
We also performed the similar experiments with another kind of anti-z66 antibody prepared by immunizing rabbits with a z66-speciﬁc ﬂagellin that was expressed in Escherichia coli JM109 with an ﬂjB : z66 recombinant plasmid ( pET28a-ﬂjB ) and puriﬁed with a Ni-TED packed column , and obtained very similar results ( data not shown ) . 
These results suggest that the transcriptional responses of S. Typhi are H : z66 ﬂagellum 
Fig. 1 . 
DNA microarray analysis of anti-z66 antiserum-induced gene expression regulation . 
Red circles correspond to genes whose expression 
dependent . 
When S. Typhi was treated with anti-z66 antiserum for 30 min , signiﬁcant induction was observed for many genes involved in DNA replication , transcription and translation . 
These genes include recO , priB , nusA , pheS , pheT , infA , prfA , prfC , fusA , trmD , yfjA , rnpA , rph and rhlE . 
Their expression was increased by more than threefold . 
Most remarkably , 44 genes encoding ribosomal proteins were coordinately upre-gulated . 
Moreover , expression of several genes ( carAB , guaBA , purM , prsA and purB ) involved in nucleotide bio-synthesis pathways increased signiﬁcantly in our experiments . 
In addition , genes ( speD and potABC ) involved in the biosynthesis and transport of spermidine , a kind of polyamine known to be necessary for cell growth , were also upregulated in the responses . 
Polyamines are reported to play an important role in the bacterial responses to temperature shock , oxidative stress , choline limitation and in vivo growth in Streptococcus pneumoniae pathogenesis ( Shah et al. , 2008 ) . 
Taken together , this suggests that upon treatment with the anti-z66 antibody , S. Typhi become actively 
involved in robust DNA , RNA and protein biosynthesis . 
Fig. 3 . 
Comparison of global transcriptional responses of z661 wildtype strain and ﬂjB : z66-deleted mutant to anti-z66 antiserum . 
Blue circles and pink circles represent gene expressional regulations in the ﬂjB : z66-deleted mutant and z66-positive wild-type strain , respectively . 
None of the signiﬁcant gene expression changes ( over threefold ) in wildtype strain was found in the ﬂjB : z66-deleted mutant . 
Ab , antibody ; WT , 
wild type . 
Transcriptional expression changes of genes associated with the metabolism of substrates often emerge in bacterial responses to environmental stresses ( Dressaire et al. , 2008 ; Hüfner et al. , 2008 ) . 
In this study , we also observed different responses in genes involved in energy metabolism . 
On the one hand , genes involved in transport and metabolism of carbohydrates , amino acids and fatty acids ( pfkB , poxB , lldP , 
Genes Forward primers Reverse primers ﬁs 50-GCGTAAATTCTGACGTACTG 50-TGTATTGCATCACCATGTCC rplB 50-ACTTCAAACGCAACAAAGAC 50-TTTACGCATTTCACCAGAAC purB 50-GTATCGGATGGAGCGTCAGT 50-GTAGAAGAACCGATCTCTCC acs 50-GAATACACTGCTGGATCTGGG 50-AGTGACATTCGGGTTTTTCAG ﬂiC 50-GAAACTGCTGTAACCGTTGA 50-CAACGCCAGTACCATCTGTA poxB 50-TGGCTTCTCTTCTGGCTTC 50-GCTTTAATATCGCCCACCAG aldB , acs , ugpBA , fadBA , dadA , argDT , astD , gltJKL and gabDT ) were signiﬁcantly downregulated . 
On the other , several genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation and energy production ( ydgQ , rnfD , cydBA and atpACDG ) were upregulated . 
Of course , we are also interested in the expression of ﬂagellar genes in this response . 
Surprisingly , genes involved in ﬂagellar biosynthesis and function exhibited no signiﬁcant differential expression , except for the ﬂagellin gene ﬂiC ( reduced by more than threefold ) . 
An ﬂiC expression repress gene , ﬂjA , is located downstream of ﬂjB : z66 on the linear plasmid ( Baker et al. , 2007a , b ; Zou et al. , 2009 ) . 
We did not ﬁnd the truncation of the linear plasmid in the initial stage of the antiﬂagellum antibody stress . 
The essential relationship between this early transcriptional responses and the later phase variation of S. Typhi by truncating the linear plasmid requires more experiments for clariﬁcation . 
In summary , this study shows that the global transcriptional response of Salmonella to antiﬂagellin antiserum are ﬂagellum dependent . 
Without a control experiment , using speciﬁc antinonﬂagellin antibodies at this time , we can not completely exclude the possibility that some gene expression regulation of the response may appear in responses to attacks by other kinds of antibodies . 
Fig. 3 . 
Comparison of global transcriptional responses of z661 wildtype strain and ﬂjB : z66-deleted mutant to anti-z66 antiserum . 
Blue circles and pink circles represent gene expressional regulations in the ﬂjB : z66-deleted mutant and z66-positive wild-type strain , respectively . 
wild type . 
. 
Acknowledgements
We thank Professor T. Ezaki ( Gifu University ) for the bacterial strain , anti-z66 antiserum and continuous support . 
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 30870095 ) , the National Special Scientiﬁc Program ( 2008ZX10004-009 ) and the National Key Technology R&D Program ( 2006BAK02A15 ) . 
Pathogenesis 45 : 167 -- 172 . 
Tamura K , Sakazaki R , Kuramochi S & Nakamura A ( 1988 ) Occurrence of H-antigen Z66 of R phase in cultures of 
plasmid of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi under environmental stresses . 
New Microbiol 31 : 241 -- 247 . 
Yamamoto S & Kutsukake K ( 2006 ) FljA-mediated posttranscriptional control of phase 1 ﬂagellin expression in ﬂagellar phase variation of Salmonella enterica serovar 
Typhimurium . 
J Bacteriol 188 : 958 -- 967 . 
3149 -- 3152 . 
Supporting Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article : 
Table S1 . 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi GIFU10007 genes that are highly induced by anti-z66 antiserum for 30 min with at least threefold changes . 
Table S2 . 
Data of the microarrays containing 4157 Salmo-nella enterica serovar Typhi GIFU10007 genes . 
Please note : Wiley-Blackwell is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors . 
Any queries ( other than missing material ) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article . 
References 
Baker S , Hardy J , Sanderson KE , Quail M , Goodhead I , Kingsley RA , Parkhill J , Stocker B & Dougan G ( 2007a ) A novel linear plasmid mediates ﬂagellar variation in Salmonella Typhi . 
PloS Pathog 3 : e59 . 
Baker S , Holt K , Whitehead S , Goodhead I , Perkins T , Stocker B , Hardy J & Dougan G ( 2007b ) A linear plasmid truncation induces unidirectional ﬂagellar phase change in H : z66 positive Salmonella Typhi . 
Mol Microbiol 66 : 1207 -- 1218 . 
Dressaire C , Redon E , Milhem H , Besse P , Loubiere P & Cocaign ¬ 
Bousquet M ( 2008 ) Growth rate regulated genes and their wide involvement in the Lactococcus lactis stress responses . 
BMC Genomics 9 : 343 . 
Ewing WH ( 1986 ) Edwards and Ewing 's Identiﬁcation of Enterobaceriaceae , 4th edn . 
Elsevier Science Publishing Co. . 
Inc. , New York . 
Frankel G , Newton SM , Schoolnik GK & Stocker BA ( 1989 ) Intragenic recombination in a ﬂagellin gene : characterization of the H1-j gene of Salmonella Typhi . 
EMBO J 8 : 
Guinee PA , Jansen WH , Mass HM , Le Minor L & Beaud R ( 1981 ) An unusual H antigen ( Z66 ) in strains of Salmonella Typhi . 
Ann Microbiol 132 : 331 -- 334 . 
Hayashi F , Smith KD , Ozinsky A , Hawn TR , Yi EC , Goodlett DR , Eng JK , Akira S , Underhill DM & Aderem A ( 2001 ) The innate immune response to bacterial ﬂagellin is mediated by Toll-like receptor 5 . 
Nature 410 : 1099 -- 1103 . 
Huang X , Phung Le V , Dejsirilert S , Tishyadhigama P , Li Y , Liu H , 
Hirose K , Kawamura Y & Ezaki T ( 2004 ) Cloning and characterization of the gene encoding the z66 antigen of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi . 
FEMS Microbiol Lett 234 : 239 -- 246 . 
Huang X , Xu H , Sun X , Ohkusu K , Kawamura Y & Ezaki T ( 2007 ) Genome-wide scan of the gene expression kinetics of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi during hyperosmotic stress . 
Int J Mol Sci 8 : 116 -- 135 . 
Hüfner E , Britton RA , Roos S , Jonsson H & Hertel C ( 2008 ) 
Jones BD , Lee CA & Falkow S ( 1992 ) Invasion by Salmonella Typhimurium is affected by the direction of ﬂagellar rotation . 
Infect Immun 60 : 2475 -- 2480 . 
Mashimo T , Hashimoto M , Yamaguchi S & Aizawa S ( 2007 ) Temperature-hypersensitive sites of the ﬂagellar switch 
component FliG in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium J Bacteriol 189 : 5153 -- 5160 . 
Shah P , Romero DG & Swiatlo E ( 2008 ) Role of polyamine transport in Streptococcus pneumoniae response to physiological stress and murine septicemia . 
Microb 
Sheng X , Huang X , Mao L , Zhu C , Xu S , Zhang H , Xu H & Liu X ( 2009 ) Preparation of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi genomic DNA microarray for gene expression proﬁle analysis . 
Prog Biochem Biophys 36 : 206 -- 212 . 
Salmonella serovar Typhi originated from Indonesia . 
Epidemiol Infect 101 : 311 -- 314 . 
Wang Q , Suzuki A , Mariconda S , Porwollik S & Harshey RM ( 2005 ) Sensing wetness : a new role for the bacterial ﬂagellum . 
EMBO J 24 : 2034 -- 2042 . 
Xu S , Zhang H , Sheng X , Xu H & Huang X ( 2008 ) Transcriptional expression of ﬂjB : z66 , a ﬂagellin gene located on a novel linear 
Zou X , Huang X , Xu S , Zhou L , Sheng X , Zhang H , Xu H & Ezaki T ( 2009 ) Identiﬁcation of a ﬂjA gene on a linear plasmid as the repressor gene of ﬂiC in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi . 
Microbiol Immunol 53 : 191 -- 197 .