738 
Journal of Food Protection , Vol . 
75 , No. 4 , 2012 , Pages 738-742 doi : 10.4315 / 0362-028X . 
JFP-11-408 Copyright © , International Association for Food Protection 
Research Note 
An Outbreak of Salmonella Chester Infection in Canada : Rare Serotype , Uncommon Exposure , and Unusual Population Demographic Facilitate Rapid Identification of Food Vehicle 
JOHN TAYLOR , 1 2 ELENI GALANIS,1-2 * LYNN WILCOTT ,3 LINDA HOANG ,4 5 JASON STONE ,6 JUDI EKKERT ,7 DOUG QUIBELL ,8 MARK HUDDLESTON ,9 RACHEL McCORMICK , 10 YVONNE WHITFIELD , 11 BUAY ADHIKARI , 12 CHRISTOPHER C. R. GRANT , 13 DAVENDRA SHARMA , 14 and THE SALMONELLA CHESTER OUTBREAK INVESTIGATION TEAMf 
1Epidemiology Services , 3Food Protection Services , and 5Public Health Microbiology and Reference Laboratory , British Columbia Centre for Disease Control , Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada V5Z 4R4 ; 2School o f Population and Public Health and 4Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine , University ofBritish Columbia , Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada V6T1Z3 ; 6Communicable Disease Control , Fraser Health Authority , Port Moody , British Columbia , Canada V3H 5C9 ; '' Communicable Disease Unit , Interior Health , Vernon , British Columbia , Canada VIB 2T1 ; 8Public Health Protection , Northern Health Authority , Terrace , British Columbia , Canada V8G 4T2 ; 9Environmental Health Services Vancouver Coastal Health , Powell River , British Columbia , Canada V8A 5R3 ; 10Centre for Food-borne , Environmental and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases , Public Health Agency of Canada , Guelph , Ontario , Canada N1H 8J1 ; 11Enteric Zoonotic and Vectorborne Diseases , Public Health Ontario , Toronto , Ontario , Canada M5S 2B2 ; 12Population Health Branch , Saskatchewan Ministry of Health , Regina , Saskatchewan , Canada S4S 6X6 ; n PulseNet Canada , Public Health Agency of Canada , Winnipeg , Manitoba , Canada R3E 3P6 ; ,4 Office ofFood Safety and Recall and ,5 Food Microbiology and Extraneous Material Evaluation Section , Canadian Food Inspection Agency , Ottawa , Ontario , Canada KIA 0Y9 ; xbHealth Protection and Environmental Services , Vancouver Island Health Authority , Victoria , British Columbia , Canada V8X 5A7 ; 17Public Health Division , Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care , Toronto , Ontario , Canada M7A 1R3 ; and xsFood Investigation and Recall , Canadian Food Inspection Agency , Burnaby , British Columbia , Canada V5C 6S7 
MS 11-408 : Received 6 September 2011/Accepted 4 December 2011 
ABSTRACT
Salmonella Chester infection has rarely been reported in the literature . 
In 2010 , 33 case patients were reported in 2 months in four Canadian provinces . 
We conducted an outbreak investigation in collaboration with public health agencies , food safety specialists , regulatory agencies , grocery store chains , and the product distributor . 
We used case patient interviews , customer loyalty cards , and microbiological testing of clinical and food samples to identify nationally distributed head cheese as the food vehicle responsible for the outbreak . 
The rare serotype , a limited affected demographic group , and an uncommon exposure led to the rapid identification of the source . 
Control measures were implemented within 9 days of notification of the outbreak . 
Salmonella Chester is a rare serotype of Salmonella that accounts for an average of seven human infections per year in Canada ( 12 ) . 
In 2008 , Salmonella Chester accounted for 0.16 % ( 10 of 6,351 ) of all human Salmonella infections reported in Canada ( 12 ) . 
Previous outbreaks of Salmonella Chester infection have been associated with precooked roast beef , cantaloupe , marine turtle , cuttlefish chips , alfalfa sprouts , and frozen dinners ( 2 , 7 , 11 , 18 , 19 , 22 ) . 
No reservoir has been identified , although Salmonella Chester has been isolated from various animals , including turkeys , cattle , reptiles , and birds ( 1 ) . 
* Author for correspondence . 
Tel : 604-707-2558 ; Fax : 604-707-2516 ; E-mail : eleni.galanis@bccdc.ca . 
t Salmonella Chester Outbreak Investigation Team ( in alphabetic order ) : Rod Asplin ,6 Enrico Buenaventura ,15 Grant Campbell ,15 Joyce Cheng ,10 Keir Cordner ,16 Lisa Fortuna ,17 Joe Fung ,5 Jeanie Fraser ,7 Yana Gryshan ,15 Loretta Janz ,5 Danielle Jorgensen ,5 Marie-Claude Lavoie ,15 Ken Louie ,6 Colin Merz ,8 Dan Moreau ,16 Ken Skibinski ,18 Andrea Stiller ,6 Helena Swinkels ,2 ' 6 Alexander Todd ,15 Lorelee Tschetter ,13 Julie Wong 5 and Tony Wong .5 
On 5 July 2010 , the British Columbia Centre for Disease Control Public Health Microbiology and Reference Laboratory ( BCCDC Lab ) identified five case patients with Salmonella Chester infections that occurred within 1 week across the province of British Columbia , Canada . 
By September 2010 , 33 case patients with Salmonella Chester infection had been reported across Canada . 
In this article , we describe how we used case patient interviews , grocery store customer loyalty card purchase histories , and micro biological testing to identify a new source of Salmonella Chester and to intervene rapidly during a multiprovince outbreak in Canada . 
vehicle . 
Salmonellosis is a reportable disease in BC . 
All case patients are interviewed using a standard salmonellosis follow-up questionnaire , and all Salmonella isolates are sent to the BCCDC Lab for serotyping by slide agglutination according to established procedures ( 5,6 ) and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis ( PFGE ) wit 
MATERIALS AND METHODS Initial outbreak investigation : identification of the food 
Xbal and Blnl restriction endonucleases using standardized PFGE methodology ( 13 ) . 
Isolates from case patients in other provinces are analyzed by PFGE in each province and at the National Microbiology Laboratory , which uses the same methods . 
After the outbreak was identified on 5 July , BC standard salmonellosis questionnaires were reviewed for common expo sures . 
Starting on 13 July , case patients were reinterviewed using a specifically developed Salmonella Chester outbreak question naire , which included hypothesis-generating questions about foods consumed by the population affected and hypothesis-testing questions about foods and locations identified through the standard questionnaire , including deli products . 
Purchase histories were obtained from consenting case patients through their customer loyalty cards . 
Once we identified the likely food vehicle , we compared the purchase dates and stores of purchase with the distribution list provided by the supplier to determine which product lots were likely involved . 
RESULTS Initial outbreak investigation : identification of the 
National investigation : outbreak characterization and microbiological confirmation . 
The Canadian Food Inspection 
Agency ( CFLA ) collected 112 samples of meat products , 7 samples of spices , and 68 environmental swabs and conducted a comprehensive food safety inspection of the suspected manufac turing facility . 
Samples were analyzed using a combination of a rapid screening method ( 8 ) with confirmation of presumptive positive samples ( 9 ) . 
Salmonella isolates from all positive samples were sent to the World Organization of Animal Health Reference Laboratory for Salmonellosis ( Salmonella Typing Laboratory , Laboratory of Foodbome Zoonoses , Public Health Agency of Canada , Guelph , Ontario ) for serotyping . 
The O ( somatic ) antigens of Salmonella isolates were detected with a slide agglutination method ( 5 ) . 
The H ( flagella ) antigens were detected with a microtiter plate technique ( 17 ) . 
The antigenic formulae of Grimont and Weill ( 6 ) were used to name the serovars . 
Salmonella Chester isolates from all positive samples were further characterized by PFGE as previously described ( 13 ) . 
PFGE and pattern analyses were performed by the CFIA PFGE Centre ( PulseNet Canada , National Molecular Subtyping Network for Food-Bome Disease Surveillance , Winnipeg , Manitoba ) . 
The PFGE patterns for both human and food isolates were analyzed using the BioNumerics software package , version 6.1 ( Applied Maths , Sint-Martens-Latem , Belgium ) . 
The PFGE patterns were compared against data in the PulseNet Canada national Salmonella database . 
food vehicle . 
Between 5 and 12 July , investigation of the first eight case patients in BC suggested that the outbreak was affecting exclusively elderly individuals ( mean age , 79 years ; range , 65 to 95 years ) and a similar proportion of men ( 50 % ) and women . 
All case patients had a European last name . 
Interviews revealed that five of seven case patients for which grocery store information was available shopped at the same chain in three different locations . 
Five of eight case patients reported eating food purchased from a supermarket deli , and two of eight reported consuming head cheese . 
Head cheese is a product made of meat and gelatin derived from the head of a pig and flavored with spices . 
By 13 July , all eight BC case patients who were interviewed using the Salmonella Chester outbreak ques tionnaire reported consuming head cheese . 
We obtained purchase histories from four case patients , and three of these confirmed purchase of head cheese on 20 and 21 June . 
The two implicated grocery store chains reported a common supplier of the product . 
When we compared the purchase dates and stores where head cheese was purchased with the distribution list provided by the supplier , we identified a suspect lot that could have accounted for all cases . 
Cases reported later in the outbreak suggested contamination of an additional lot . 
About 90 % of the product from these two lots had been distributed to BC retailers ; the rest was sent to other provinces and territories . 
National investigation : outbreak characterization and microbiological confirmation . 
Between 5 July and 2 
September 2010 , 33 cases of Salmonella Chester infection were reported in four Canadian provinces ( Fig. 1 and Table 1 ) . 
The majority of these cases ( 30 of 33 ) occurred in BC . 
One each was reported from the provinces of Ontario , Alberta , and Saskatchewan . 
Symptom onset ranged from 21 June to 15 August ( Fig. 2 ) . 
The ages of case patients ranged from 24 to 95 years , with a median of 75 years ( Fig. 3 ) . 
Of the case patients for whom we had exposure information , 27 ( 93 % ) of 29 either reported consuming head cheese or thei consumer loyalty card records showed that they had purchased head cheese ( Table 2 ) . 
Most case patients had onset of clinical signs during a 4-week period . 
Two case patients had onset 2 months after onset in the first case patient : one had consumed head cheese several weeks earlier and was asymptomatically infected , and the other was symptomatic but did not recall consuming head cheese . 
It is unclear how this case patient became infected . 
Five case patients had a Salmonella Chester urinary tract infection , and two had bacteremia . 
One case patient with bacteremia also produced a Salmonella Chester positive sputum sample . 
Two case patients were asymp tomatic , with Salmonella Chester isolated from stool and urine approximately 3 to 5 weeks after consumption of head cheese . 
Two case patients shed Salmonella Chester in stool for at least 4 months ( 123 and 126 days ) . 
All Salmonella Chester strains isolated from human and food samples had an indistinguishable Xbal PFGE pattern , and all but two case patient isolates had an indistinguishable Bln \ PFGE pattern ; these two isolates were highly similar to the predominant strain pattern , differing by one band shift . 
According to the PulseNet Canada Network , these PFGE pattern combinations had not been reported previ ously in Canada and were different from the pattern of the Salmonella Chester isolate associated with another outbreak that had recently occurred in the United States ( 2 ) . 
Salmonella Chester was isolated from 10 samples of head cheese . 
The samples originated from opened and unopened packages from two lots . 
Both of these lots were implicated by the epidemiologic investigation of case patients ; however , the packages that were tested were not associated with case patients . 
Opened packages that were positive for Salmonella Chester were obtained from retailers during the recall process . 
All environmental and spice samples were negative for Salmonella . 
Some meat samples were contaminated with Salmonella Brandenburg and Listeria monocytogenes . 
These strains were not associated with known cases of human illness . 
An investigation of the manufacturing facility revealed that some of the head cheese may not have been cooked to a temperature adequate for killing foodbome pathogens . 
SALMONELLA CHESTER OUTBREAK CAUSED BY HEAD CHEESE CONSUMPTION 
FIGURE 1 . 
Timeline o f Salmonella Chester infection outbreak in Canada , June through September 2010 . 
RESULTS Initial outbreak investigation : identification of the 
DISCUSSION
To our knowledge , this is the first published report of an outbreak of Salmonella Chester infection associated with head cheese consumption . 
We used a multistage investiga tion in collaboration with public health agencies , food safety specialists , regulatory agencies , grocery store chains , and the product distributor to identify the source of contamina tion and take measures to protect the public . 
A number of unique features of this outbreak contributed to its rapid resolution . 
We began our investi gation of the first eight case patients with laboratory-confirmed Salmonella Chester infection pending PFGE results , assuming that this cluster of a rare serotype likely represented an outbreak . 
The age distribution and surname origin of case patients suggested a source that was specific to elderly individuals and preferred by consumers of European descent . 
Although no population data on con sumption of head cheese in Canada have been compiled , to our knowledge this food is not widely consumed . 
We suspect that it is most commonly consumed among this demographic group . 
We pursued this uncommon exposure as a hypothesis early in the investigation after consumption of this product was reported by a small proportion of case patients . 
Preexisting relationships with grocery store chains allowed rapid access to consenting case patients ' purchase histories , which further strengthened our epidemiologic investigation . 
This investigative technique has been effec tive in previous outbreak investigations ( 15 ) . 
Further epidemiologic data combined with microbiological food sampling and a food safety investigation consolidated the evidence to confirm that head cheese was the source of the outbreak . 
Close to 18 % of case patients were diagnosed as infected by culturing nonenteric specimens , most often urine . 
Extraintestinal salmonellosis has been reported more commonly among elderly individuals ( 16 , 23 ) . 
Several case patients shed the bacteria in stool for several weeks to months . 
The median duration of nontyphoidal Salmonella shedding has been reported as 3 to 5 weeks but can differ among serotypes ( 4 , 10 ) . 
Salmonella Chester may be shed longer than other strains of Salmonella , or factors associated with this older age group may prolong shedding ( e.g. , gallbladder disease ) . 
Before microbiological confirmation in the suspect food , strong epidemiologic data allowed identification of the 
TAYLOR ET AL. . 
TABLE 1 . 
Salmonella Chester infection outbreak case definition , Canada , 2010 Case type Case definition 
Confirmed 
Laboratory confirmation of Salmonella Chester with a PFGE pattern consistent with the outbreak strain and/or epidemiologic link to purchase or consumption of head cheese ; AND a laboratory confirmation date on or after 1 June 2010 ; AND the individual is a resident of or visitor to Canada . 
FIGURE 2 . 
Confirmed cases o/Salmonella Chester ( n = 32 ) infection in Canada by date o f onset , June through August 2010 . 
0 Specimen collection ■ Symptom onset 
Date of onse 
'' In some case patients , Salmonella Chester was isolated from multiple sites . 
food vehicle , manufacturer , and lot numbers associated with the outbreak and thus early intervention to prevent further infections . 
On 14 July , 9 days after the outbreak was declared , the supplier initiated a voluntary recall of the product . 
On the same day , health and food safety authorities issued a public advisory and a health hazard alert , respectively . 
The only previous health advisory we identified associated with Salmonella-contaminated head cheese occurred for head cheese produced and distributed at a private residence in the United States in 2009 ( 14 ) . 
Head cheese also has been associated with three U.S. recalls due to contamination with Listeria monocytogenes ( 3 , 20 , 21 ) . 
FIGURE 3 . 
Number o/Salmonella Chester infection case patients in Canada by age group , June through August 2010 . 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the contributions of Janice Bridgland , Marsha Taylor , and Ana Paccagnella ( BCCDC ) , Carmen Savelli ( Public Health Agency of Canada ) , and the staff of the Community and Population Health Division at Alberta Health and Wellness for their epidemiological support . 
We also thank the staff from the Canadian Food Inspection Agency Ontario Operations Branch , Food Microbiology Laboratory Services , and Office of Food Safety and Recall for their support in the food safety investigation . 
Finally , we thank the members of the PulseNet Canada Network , in particular the database managers at the National Microbiology Laboratory , for their national PFGE analysis and interpretation . 
REFERENCES