lable at ScienceDirect Contents lists avai 
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications
journal homepage : www.elsevier.com/locate/ybbrc 
O-antigen chain-length distribution in Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis is regulated by oxygen availability 
Cecilia A. Silva-Valenzuela a , b , Felipe Velasquez a , Johany Pe ~ ailillo a , Hector Garcias-Papayani a , Paulina Fernandez a , Pía Tobar a , Ines Contreras a , Carlos A. Santiviago a , Sergio A. Alvarez a , * 
a Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular , Facultad de Ciencias Químicas y Farmaceuticas , Universidad de Chile , Santiago , Chile b Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology , Tufts University , Boston , MA , USA 
abstract 
article info 
Article history : Received 8 June 2016 
Lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) consists of three covalently linked domains : the lipid A , the core region and the O antigen ( OAg ) , consisting of repeats of an oligosaccharide . 
Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis ( S. Enteritidis ) produces a LPS with two OAg preferred chain lengths : a long ( L ) - OAg controlled by WzzSE and a very long ( VL ) - OAg controlled by WzzfepE . 
In this work , we show that OAg produced by S. Enteritidis grown in E minimal medium also presented two preferred chain-lengths . 
However , a simultaneous and opposing change in the production of L-OAg and VL-OAg was observed in response to oxygen availability . 
Biochemical and genetics analyses indicate that this process is regulated by transcriptional factors Fnr and ArcA by means of controlling the transcription of genes encoding WzzSE and WzzfepE in response to oxygen availability . 
Thus , our results revealed a sophisticated regulatory mechanism involved in the adaptation of S. Enteritidis to one of the main environmental cues faced by this pathogen during infection . 
© 2016 Elsevier Inc. . 
All rights reserved . 
Accepted 15 June 2016 Available online 23 June 2016 
Keywords : Salmonella 
Lipopolysaccharide O antigen Anaerobiosis ArcA Fnr 
1. Introduction
Infections caused by Salmonella constitute a severe health problem , particularly in developing countries . 
Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis ( S. Enteritidis ) is considered the primary cause of food-borne salmonellosis worldwide [ 1,2 ] . 
In humans , S. Enteritidis causes a syndrome characterized by diarrhea , fever and abdominal pain [ 2 ] . 
The mechanisms involved in S. Enteritidis pathogenicity are poorly understood , and most knowledge is based on studies conducted in S. Typhimurium , which causes a similar disease in humans . 
However , it is known that S. Enteritidis genes involved in lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) synthesis and modiﬁcation are essential for systemic colonization in mice [ 3 ] and hens [ 4 ] , and also for resistance to serum [ 5 ] and survival in egg albumen [ 4 ] . 
The LPS consists of three structural domains : the lipid A region embedded in the outer membrane , the core oligosaccharide , and 
* Corresponding author . 
Laboratorio de Microbiología , Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular , Facultad de Ciencias Químicas y Farmaceuticas , Universidad de Chile , Santos Dumont 964 , Independencia , Santiago , Chile . 
E-mail address : salvarez@uchile.cl ( S.A. Alvarez ) . 
the O antigen ( OAg ) exposed on the bacterial surface [ 6 ] . 
The number of O antigen units that are attached to the lipid A-core region is regulated by the chain-length determinants WzzSE and WzzfepE . 
We described that S. Enteritidis NCTC13349 produces LPS with two preferred OAg chain lengths : a long ( L ) - OAg controlled by WzzSE and a very long ( VL ) - OAg controlled by WzzfepE [ 5 ] . 
To date , not much is known about the environmental regulation of OAg production and chain-length distribution . 
A previous study in S. Anatum showed that the growth temperature affects the size and distribution of the OAg molecules [ 7 ] . 
Also , Murray et al. [ 8 ] reported that S. Typhimurium incubated in heat-inactivated guinea pig serum or grown under iron-limiting conditions resul-ted in an increased production of VL-OAg . 
More recently , Delgado et al. [ 9 ] demonstrated that expression of the OAg chain-length determinant wzzST in S. Typhimurium was induced in deﬁned medium containing low Mg2þ plus Fe3þ , in a pathway that requires the PhoP/PhoQ and PmrA/PmrB two-component systems . 
In addition , we have shown that production of OAg by S. Typhi , S. Typhi-murium and S. Enteritidis is growth phase-regulated in a RfaH-dependent manner [ 5,10 ] . 
One of the conditions that Salmonella encounters during infection is low oxygen availability in the ileum and within host cell 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.06.074 0006-291X / © 2016 Elsevier Inc. . 
All rights reserved . 
[ 11,12 ] . 
Adaptation to oxygen deprivation involves the global regulators Fnr and ArcA , which control the expression of a large number of genes whose products are mainly involved in adaptation to anaerobiosis [ 13e18 ] . 
In addition , transcriptomic analyses have shown that Fnr and ArcA also regulate the expression of several genes linked to S. Typhimurium virulence . 
However , oxygendependent regulation of OAg production and chain-length distribution has not been addressed . 
In this work , we show that the chain-length distribution of OAg in S. Enteritidis is under oxygendependent regulation mediated by Fnr and ArcA , which control the expression of the genes encoding WzzSE and WzzfepE chainlength determinants . 
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Bacterial strains, plasmids, media and growth conditions
Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table 1 . 
Cultures were performed in Luria-Bertani ( LB ) medium ( 10 g/L tryptone , 5 g/L NaCl and 5 g/L yeast extract ) or E minimal medium ( 0.2 g/L MgSO4 7H2O , 2 g/L citric acid monohydrate , 13.1 g/L K2HPO4 3H2O , 3.3 g/L NaNH4HPO4 4H2O ) supplemented with 0.2 % glucose as carbon source ( E-glucose ) . 
For aerobic or anaerobic cultures , LB-grown overnight cultures were diluted 1:100 in E-glucose . 
Aerobic cultures were incubated at 37 C with shaking and anaerobic cultures were incubated at 37 C in an anaerobic jar with the AnaeroGen system ( Oxoid ) . 
Where appropriate , media were supplemented with ampicillin ( Amp , 100 mg / mL ) , chloramphenicol ( Cam , 20 mg/mL ) or kanamycin ( Kan , 50 mg / mL ) . 
Media were solidiﬁed by the addition of 15 g/L agar . 
2.2. Mutagenesis and standard DNA techniques
Total genomic DNA was obtained from overnight cultures using the `` GenElute Bacterial Genomic DNA Kit '' ( Sigma-Aldrich ) according to the manufacturer 's instructions . 
Plasmid DNA was obtained from overnight cultures using the `` QIAprep Spin Miniprep Kit '' ( QIAGEN ) , according to the manufacturer 's instructions . 
When required , PCR products were puriﬁed using the `` QIAquick PCR Pu-riﬁcation Kit '' ( QIAGEN ) . 
S. Enteritidis DarcA and Dfnr strains were constructed by allelic exchange as described [ 19 ] , using plasmid pCLF4 as template and primers listed in Table S1 . 
The mutant alleles were transduced to the wild-type background using phage P22 HT105/1 int-201 . 
The DarcA Dfnr mutant was generated by transduction of the Dfnr : : Kan allele into a DarcA : : FRT recipient strain . 
A mutant strain expressing a WzzfepE-3xFLAG protein fusion was constructed by allelic exchange as described [ 20 ] , using plasmid pSUB11 as template and primers listed in Table S1 . 
The corresponding mutant allele was transduced to the wild-type , DarcA and Dfnr backgrounds using phage P22 HT105/1 int-201 . 
When required , the antibiotic-resistance cassettes inserted during mutagenesis were removed by transforming the corresponding mutants with pCP20 , which encodes the FLP recombinase [ 21 ] . 
Gene replacements and deletion of antibiotic-resistance cassettes were conﬁrmed by PCR . 
2.3. LPS analysis
LPS samples were prepared as described [ 22 ] . 
Brieﬂy , bacteria obtained from aerobic or anaerobic cultures were adjusted to an OD600 1/4 2.0 . 
Next , 1.5 mL of each suspension were centrifuged and bacterial pellets were suspended in 100 mL of lysis buffer containing proteinase K. LPS was separated in 12 % ( w/v ) acrylamide gels using a Tricine-SDS buffer system ( Tricine-SDS-PAGE ) [ 23 ] and visualized by silver staining [ 22 ] . 
2.4. RNA isolation and qRT-PCR assays
RNA isolation was performed as described [ 24 ] from at least three independent aerobic or anaerobic cultures grown in E-glucose . 
Brieﬂy , bacteria were grown to an OD600 1/4 0.3 and total RNA was extracted using the `` SV Total RNA Isolation '' kit ( Promega ) . 
Samples were treated with RNase-free DNaseI ( Qiagen ) at 25 C for 45 min . 
RNA samples were kept at 20 C until further use . 
For qRT-PCR assays , 1 mg of total RNA was subjected to reverse transcription using SuperScript II ( Life Technologies ) following manufacturer 's instructions . 
DNA fragments of ~ 300 bp for each gene were ampliﬁed using the `` Kapa Sybr Fast '' kit ( Kapa Biosistems ) in an Mx3000P qPCR System with MxPro software ( Agilent Technologies , Inc ) . 
Data were analyzed using the relative expression software tool REST [ 25 ] and rpoD was used as housekeeping gene because its expression is not inﬂuenced by oxygen availability in Salmonella [ 26 ] . 
2.5. Western blot analyses of the 3xFLAG-tagged chain-length regulator WzzfepE
Total protein samples obtained from bacteria grown under aerobic or anaerobic conditions ( OD600 1/4 0.3 ) were separated by SDS-PAGE in a 10 % polyacrylamide gel . 
Gel loading was normalized so that each sample represented the same number of bacterial cells . 
Western blot analysis was performed as described [ 27 ] . 
WzzfepE-3xFLAG protein signal was quantiﬁed by densitometry analysis using UN-SCAN-IT software ( Silk Scientiﬁc ) . 
Values were normalized to the total amount of protein in the corresponding lane , as determined by densitometry of a Coomassie-blue stained gel analyzed in parallel . 
Table 1 
Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study . 
Relevant properties 
Strain or plasmid Salmonella Enteritidis 
Source or reference 
NCTC13349 Dfnr DarcA DarcA Dfnr Plasmids pGEM-T Easy pBAD-TOPO parcA pfnr pJC142 pKD46 pCLF4 pCP20 pSUB11 
Laboratory stock This study This study This study 
Wild-type strain NCTC13349 Dfnr : : FRT 
NCTC13349 DarcA : : FRT NCTC13349 DarcA : : FRT Dfnr : : Kan , KanR 
TA cloning vector , AmpR TA cloning vector , AmpR 
Promega 
Life Technologies This study This study [ 5 ] [ 33 ] [ 19 ] [ 21 ] [ 20 
arcA cloned in pBAD-TOPO fnr cloned in pBAD-TOPO wzzfepE cloned in pGEM-T Easy bla PBAD gam bet exo pSC101 oriTS , AmpR bla FRT aph FRT PS1 PS2 ori R6K , T7 promoter , AmpR , KanR bla cat cI857 lPR ﬂp pSC101 oriTS , CamR , AmpR Template plasmid to generate 3xFLAG fusions , ori R R6K , Kan 
3. Results
3.1. Oxygen availability modulates the OAg polymerization in S. Enteritidis
To assess the effect of oxygen availability on OAg production by S. Enteritidis , the wild-type strain and its isogenic DarcA and Dfnr mutants were grown under aerobic or anaerobic conditions , and LPS proﬁles analyzed by Tricine-SDS-PAGE . 
As described [ 5 ] , S. Enteritidis grown in LB produces OAg with two preferred chain lengths : L-OAg and VL-OAg . 
However , when bacteria were grown under aerobic conditions in E-glucose medium , VL-OAg was almost absent and a high level of L-OAg was observed ( Fig. 1 ) . 
In contrast , bacteria grown anaerobically produced high levels of VL-OAg with a concomitant slight decrease in L-OAg levels ( Fig. 1 ) . 
Deletion of arcA gene resulted in a dramatic reduction of VL-OAg under anaerobic conditions as compared to the wild type . 
Strikingly , a high increase of VL-OAg in aerobic conditions was observed in the Dfnr and DarcA Dfnr backgrounds as compared to the wild type ( Fig. 1 ) . 
3.2. Oxygen availability regulates the expression of wzzSE and wzzfepE in S. Enteritidis
The above results lead us to hypothesize that the expression of genes encoding the OAg chain-length regulators WzzSE and WzzfepE are regulated by ArcA or Fnr in response to oxygen availability . 
In support of this notion , our bioinformatics analyses showed that the promoter regions of wzzSE and wzzfepE include putative binding sites for ArcA and Fnr ( Fig . 
S1 ) . 
To determine whether the expression of wzzSE and wzzfepE is affected by oxygen availability , we measured the relative abundance of transcripts for both genes in bacteria grown anaerobically and aerobically . 
We observed that expression of wzzSE in the wild-type strain was 4 times lower after anaerobic growth than after aerobic growth ( Fig. 2A ) . 
In contrast , expression of wzzfepE showed a 2-fold induction when subjected to the same comparison ( Fig. 2A ) . 
Of note , the oxygen-dependent regulation of wzzSE and wzzfepE was lost in the Dfnr mutant ( Fig. 2B ) . 
These observations are supported by the oxygendependent regulation of control genes hybO and cyoA [ 28,29 ] ( Fig. 2A ) , that was lost in the Dfnr mutant ( Fig. 2B ) . 
Unfortunately , in the case of the DarcA mutant we were not able to ﬁnd a housekeeping gene to validate eventual differences in the relative tribution . 
LPS samples obtained from bacteria grown in the presence ( þO2 ) or absence ( - O2 ) of oxygen were analyzed by Tricine-SDS-PAGE . 
expression of genes wzzSE and wzzfepE under anaerobic and aerobic conditions . 
Next , we evaluated if the dramatic effect of oxygen availability on VL-OAg production and wzzfepE expression correlates with var-iations in WzzfepE protein levels . 
To this end , we evaluated the abundance of WzzfepE under aerobic and anaerobic conditions using translational fusions to the 3xFLAG epitope ( Fig. 3 ) . 
The relative amounts of WzzfepE detected by Western blot were determined by densitometry analysis and values were normalized to the total amount of protein loaded in the corresponding lane of a Coomassie-blue stained gel analyzed in parallel . 
In agreement with the LPS proﬁle of the wild-type strain , the amount of WzzfepE produced under anaerobiosis was higher ( 70 % increase ) than that produced under aerobiosis ( Fig. 3 ) . 
In addition , the amount of WzzfepE produced by the DarcA mutant was similar to the level exhibited by the wild-type strain grown under aerobiosis . 
Of note , no oxygen-dependent regulation of WzzfepE production was observed in this mutant . 
The same was observed in the Dfnr mutant ; however , in this case the amount of WzzfepE produced was similar to that of the wild-type strain under anaerobiosis ( Fig. 3 ) . 
3.3. Overexpression of wzzfepE restores bi-modal distribution of OAg in aerobiosis and in the DarcA mutant grown in anaerobiosis
As shown , oxygen availability dramatically affects the amount of VL-OAg produced by S. Enteritidis . 
In addition , deletion of arcA results in the production of minimal amounts of VL-OAg . 
Furthermore , these phenotypes correlate with the expression levels of wzzfepE and the production of the encoded protein . 
According to this idea , one could expect that overexpression of wzzfepE would bypass the effect of ArcA and oxygen availability on VL-OAg production . 
To test this , the wild type and DarcA mutant were transformed with a plasmid including wzzfepE . 
Production of VL-OAg under aerobiosis was increased when the wild-type strain overexpressed wzzfepE ( Fig. 4A ) . 
Also , the DarcA mutant overexpressing wzzfepE produced similar levels of VL-OAg under aerobic and anaerobic conditions ( Fig. 4B ) . 
These results indicate that reduced production of VL-OAg results directly from reduced levels of WzzfepE . 
In addition , a reduction in L-OAg chain lengths was observed when bacteria overproduced WzzfepE ( Fig. 4 ) . 
4. Discussion
In this study , we describe that ArcA and Fnr are involved in the oxygen-dependent control of OAg chain-length distribution in S. Enteritidis . 
A simultaneous and opposing change in the production levels of L-OAg and VL-OAg was observed in response to oxygen availability . 
Of note , LPS proﬁles showed that S. Enteritidis cultured aerobically in minimal medium was almost devoid of VL-OAg . 
To our knowledge , this phenotype has not been described for any bimodal serovar of Salmonella enterica . 
Interestingly , our unpublished data show that the effect of oxygen is not observed in bacteria grown in LB , indicating a direct inﬂuence of culture medium on the LPS modal distribution in S. Enteritidis . 
Our data also indicate that the described OAg chain-length modulation occurs by controlling the expression of genes encoding the Wzz regulators in response to oxygen availability . 
Thus , the increased production of VL-OAg and concomitant decrease in L-OAg production observed during anaerobic vs. aerobic growth ( Fig. 1 ) correlate with the expression levels of wzzfepE and wzzSE under both conditions ( Fig. 2 ) . 
In addition , the lack of oxygendependent control of OAg modal distribution in the Dfnr and DarcA mutants ( Fig. 1 ) correlates with a deregulated expression of wzzfepE and wzzSE in response to oxygen availability ( Fig. 2 ) . 
Therefore , Fnr and ArcA participate in the oxygen-mediated contro of VL-OAg production , probably by controlling the transcription of wzzfepE and wzzSE . 
In support of this hypothesis , our bioinformatics analyses revealed the presence of a putative binding sites for Fnr at position 262 , and three putative binding sites for ArcA at positions 13 , 85 and 107 with respect to the potential transcription initiation site of wzzfepE ( Fig . 
S1 ) . 
In the case of wzzSE , we also identiﬁed a putative binding site for Fnr at position 14 , and three putative binding sites for ArcA at positions 117 , 208 and 314 , with respect to its assumed transcription initiation site ( Fig . 
S1 ) . 
Several genes regulated by oxygen availability in Escherichia coli , such as cydAB [ 30 ] , cyoABCDE , ﬁxABCX [ 28 ] and dpiBA [ 31 ] , also possess similarly-positioned Fnr and ArcA biding sites . 
Moreover , both Fnr and ArcA are able to bind in vitro to the promoter regions of wzzfepE and wzzSE in S. Enteritidis ( Fig . 
S2 ) , suggesting a direct role for these regulators in the control of wzzfepE and wzzSE transcription . 
On the other hand , the Dfnr DarcA and the Dfnr mutants produced similar levels of VL-OAg under aerobic conditions . 
This indicates that the LPS phenotype associated to the Dfnr allele does not depend on the presence of a functional ArcA . 
In contrast , the LPS phenotype associated to the DarcA allele requires the Fnr function . 
Therefore , these observations reveal a functional interplay between ArcA and Fnr to control the OAg modal distribution in S. Enteritidis in response to oxygen availability . 
In agreement with our results , both ArcA and Fnr regulate several genes in E. coli [ 13,16,32 ] . 
In some cases , this regulation can not be explained only by simple additive effects of each regulator , suggesting complex functional interactions between ArcA and Fnr [ 16 ] . 
Thus , how ArcA and Fnr inﬂuence the expression of wzzfepE and wzzSE remains unknown . 
We are currently performing site-directed mutagenesis of putative binding sites and protein binding experiments to gain insight into the mechanism of the oxygen-dependent transcriptional regulation of these genes . 
Previously , we demonstrated that the relative levels of chainlength regulators WzzB and WzzpHS-2 are critical to determine the OAg modal distribution in Shigella ﬂexneri 2a [ 27 ] . 
We also showed that both regulators compete to control the degree of OA polymerization . 
Thus , increase of one modal length results in the concomitant decrease of the other [ 27 ] . 
Here , we showed that the relative amounts of L-OAg and VL-OAg in S. Enteritidis also changed in an opposite way in response to oxygen availability , so that the decrease in L-OAg levels during anaerobiosis may be the result of an increase in VL-OAg levels . 
In support of this , when S. Enteritidis overproduced WzzfepE , not only an increment in VL-OAg , but also a reduction in L-OAg production was observed ( Fig. 4 ) . 
At present , we can only speculate on the physiological role of the described oxygen-dependent control of OAg modal distribution and its association to virulence in Salmonella . 
For instance , given that VL-OAg protects Salmonella serovars from lytic action of serum complement [ 5 ] and egg albumen [ 4 ] , increased amounts of these molecules under oxygen limitation could contribute to survival of S. Enteritidis in blood , eggs and during systemic spread in different hosts . 
Fig. 1 . 
Effect of oxygen availability and arcA and fnr deletion on OAg modal dis ¬ 
566 
Fig. 2 . 
Effect of oxygen availability and fnr deletion on the expression of genes wzzSE and wzzfepE . 
Total RNA samples were obtained from aerobic and anaerobic cultures of wild type ( A ) and Dfnr ( B ) strains , and the anaerobic/aerobic ratio of mRNA levels was obtained for each gene . 
Oxygen-regulated genes cyoA and hybO were used as controls . 
Bars represent mean values from three independent replicates . 
Error bars denote standard errors . 
Statistical signiﬁcance of observed differences was determined using tools implemented in REST software ( ** , P < 0.01 ; *** , P < 0.001 ) . 
Fig. 3 . 
Effect of oxygen availability and arcA and fnr deletion on the WzzfepE level . 
Total protein samples were obtained from bacteria grown in the presence ( þO2 ) or absence ( - O2 ) of oxygen . 
Samples were resolved by SDS-PAGE for Coomassie blue staining and detection of WzzfepE-3xFLAG by Western blot . 
The signal intensity of the fusion protein under each condition was determine by densitometry , to calculate its relative abundance with respect to the wild type grown aerobically . 
These values were normalized to total protein loaded as determined by densitometry of each whole lane . 
Fig. 4 . 
Effect of wzzfepE overexpression on OAg modal distribution . 
Wild type ( A ) and DarcA ( B ) strains were transformed with a multicopy plasmid carrying the wzzfepE gene . 
LPS samples obtained from bacteria grown in the presence or absence of oxygen were analyzed by Tricine-SDS-PAGE . 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by FONDECYT grant 1130225 ( to SA ) . 
CS was supported by FONDECYT grant 1140754 . 
PF was supported by CONICYT fellowship 21140692 . 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at http : / / dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.06.074 . 
Transparency document 
Transparency document related to this article can be found online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.06.074 . 
References 
[ 1 ] M.E. St Louis , D.L. Morse , M.E. Potter , T.M. DeMelﬁ , J.J. Guzewich , R.V. Tauxe , P.A. Blake , The emergence of grade A eggs as a major source of Salmonella enteritidis infections . 
New implications for the control of salmonellosis , JAMA 259 ( 1988 ) 2103e2107 . 
[ 2 ] J. Guard-Petter , The chicken , the egg and Salmonella enteritidis , Environ . 
Microbiol . 
3 ( 2001 ) 421e430 . 
[ 3 ] C.A. Silva , C.J. Blondel , C.P. Quezada , S. Porwollik , H.L. Andrews-Polymenis , C.S. Toro , M. Zaldívar , I. Contreras , M. McClelland , C.A. Santiviago , Infection of mice by Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis involves additional genes that are absent in the genome of serovar Typhimurium , Infect . 
Immun . 
80 ( 2012 ) 839e849 . 
[ 4 ] C. Coward , L. Sait , T. Cogan , T.J. Humphrey , D.J. Maskell , O-antigen repeat number in Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis is important for egg contamination , colonisation of the chicken reproductive tract and survival in egg albumen , FEMS Microbiol . 
Lett . 
343 ( 2013 ) 169e176 . 
[ 5 ] D. Bravo , C. Silva , J.A. Carter , A. Hoare , S.A. Alvarez , C.J. Blondel , M. Zaldivar , M.A. Valvano , I. Contreras , Growth-phase regulation of lipopolysaccharide O-antigen chain length inﬂuences serum resistance in serovars of Salmonella , J. Med . 
Microbiol . 
57 ( 2008 ) 938e946 . 
[ 6 ] C.R. Raetz , C. Whitﬁeld , Lipopolysaccharide endotoxins , Annu . 
Rev. Biochem . 
71 ( 2002 ) 635e700 . 
[ 7 ] M. McConnell , A. Wright , Variation in the structure and bacteriophage-inactivating capacity of Salmonella anatum lipopolysaccharide as a function of growth temperature , J. Bacteriol . 
137 ( 1979 ) 746e751 . 
[ 8 ] G.L. Murray , S.R. Attridge , R. Morona , Inducible serum resistance in Salmonella typhimurium is dependent on wzzfepE-regulated very long O antigen chains , Microbes Infect . 
7 ( 2005 ) 1296e1304 . 
[ 9 ] M.A. Delgado , C. Mouslim , E.A. Groisman , The PmrA/PmrB and RcsC/YojN/RcsB systems control expression of the Salmonella O-antigen chain length determinant , , Mol . 
Microbiol . 
60 ( 2006 ) 39e50 . 
[ 10 ] M. Bittner , S. Saldias , F. Altamirano , M.A. Valvano , I. Contreras , RpoS and RpoN are involved in the growth-dependent regulation of rfaH transcription and O 
antigen expression in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi , Microb . 
Pathog . 
36 ( 2004 ) 19e24 . 
[ 11 ] C. Altier , Genetic and environmental control of Salmonella invasion , J. Microbiol . 
43 ( 2005 ) 85e92 . 
Spec . 
No . 
[ 12 ] M. Rhen , C.J. Dorman , Hierarchical gene regulators adapt Salmonella enterica to its host milieus , Int . 
J. Med . 
Microbiol . 
294 ( 2005 ) 487e502 . 
[ 13 ] I. Compan , D. Touati , Anaerobic activation of arcA transcription in Escherichia coli : roles of Fnr and ArcA , Mol . 
Microbiol . 
11 ( 1994 ) 955e964 . 
[ 14 ] C.E. Bauer , S. Elsen , T.H. Bird , Mechanisms for redox control of gene expression , Annu . 
Rev. Microbiol . 
53 ( 1999 ) 495e523 . 
[ 15 ] A.S. Lynch , E.C. Lin , Transcriptional control mediated by the ArcA two-component response regulator protein of Escherichia coli : characterization of DNA binding at target promoters , J. Bacteriol . 
178 ( 1996 ) 6238e6249 . 
[ 16 ] D.A. Ravcheev , A.V. Gerasimova , A.A. Mironov , M.S. Gelfand , Comparative genomic analysis of regulation of anaerobic respiration in ten genomes from three families of gamma-proteobacteria ( Enterobacteriaceae , Pasteurellaceae , Vibrionaceae ) , BMC Genomics 8 ( 2007 ) 54 . 
[ 17 ] G. Sawers , The aerobic/anaerobic interface , , Curr . 
Opin . 
Microbiol . 
2 ( 1999 ) 181e187 . 
[ 18 ] R.P. Gunsalus , S.J. Park , Aerobic-anaerobic gene regulation in Escherichia coli : control by the ArcAB and Fnr regulons , Res . 
Microbiol . 
145 ( 1994 ) 437e450 . 
[ 19 ] C.A. Santiviago , M.M. Reynolds , S. Porwollik , S.H. Choi , F. Long , H.L. Andrews-Polymenis , M. McClelland , Analysis of pools of targeted Salmonella deletion mutants identiﬁes novel genes affecting ﬁtness during competitive infection in mice , PLoS Pathog . 
5 ( 2009 ) e1000477 . 
[ 20 ] S. Uzzau , N. Figueroa-Bossi , S. Rubino , L. Bossi , Epitope tagging of chromosomal genes in Salmonella , Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
U. S. A. 98 ( 2001 ) 15264e15269 . 
[ 21 ] P.P. Cherepanov , W. Wackernagel , Gene disruption in Escherichia coli : TcR and KmR cassettes with the option of Flp-catalyzed excision of the antibiotic-resistance determinant , Gene 158 ( 1995 ) 9e14 . 
[ 22 ] C.L. Marolda , P. Lahiry , E. Vines , S. Saldias , M.A. Valvano , Micromethods for the characterization of lipid A-core and O-antigen lipopolysaccharide , Methods Mol . 
Biol . 
347 ( 2006 ) 237e252 . 
[ 23 ] A.J. Lesse , A.A. Campagnari , W.E. Bittner , M.A. Apicella , Increased resolution of lipopolysaccharides and lipooligosaccharides utilizing tricine-sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis , J. Immunol . 
Methods 126 ( 1990 ) 109e117 . 
[ 24 ] C. Kroger , S.C. Dillon , A.D. Cameron , K. Papenfort , S.K. Sivasankaran , K. Hokamp , Y. Chao , A. Sittka , M. Hebrard , K. Handler , A. Colgan , P. Leekitcharoenphon , G.C. Langridge , A.J. Lohan , B. Loftus , S. Lucchini , D.W. Ussery , C.J. Dorman , N.R. Thomson , J. Vogel , J.C. Hinton , The transcriptional landscape and small RNAs of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium , , Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
U. S. A. 109 ( 2012 ) E1277eE1286 . 
[ 25 ] M.W. Pfafﬂ , G.W. Horgan , L. Dempﬂe , Relative expression software tool ( REST ) for group-wise comparison and statistical analysis of relative expression results in real-time PCR , Nucleic Acids Res . 
30 ( 2002 ) e36 . 
[ 26 ] R.C. Fink , M.R. Evans , S. Porwollik , A. Vazquez-Torres , J. Jones-Carson , B. Troxell , S.J. Libby , M. McClelland , H.M. Hassan , FNR is a global regulator of virulence and anaerobic metabolism in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi-murium ( ATCC 14028s ) , J. Bacteriol . 
189 ( 2007 ) 2262e2273 . 
[ 27 ] J.A. Carter , J.C. Jimenez , M. Zaldivar , S.A. Alvarez , C.L. Marolda , M.A. Valvano , I. Contreras , The cellular level of O-antigen polymerase Wzy determines chain length regulation by WzzB and WzzpHS-2 in Shigella ﬂexneri 2a , Microbiology 155 ( 2009 ) 3260e3269 . 
[ 28 ] C. Constantinidou , J.L. Hobman , L. Grifﬁths , M.D. Patel , C.W. Penn , J.A. Cole , T.W. Overton , A reassessment of the FNR regulon and transcriptomic analysis of the effects of nitrate , nitrite , NarXL , and NarQP as Escherichia coli K12 adapts from aerobic to anaerobic growth , , J. Biol . 
Chem . 
281 ( 2006 ) 4802e4815 . 
[ 29 ] D.J. Richard , G. Sawers , F. Sargent , L. McWalter , D.H. Boxer , Transcriptional regulation in response to oxygen and nitrate of the operons encoding the [ NiFe ] hydrogenases 1 and 2 of Escherichia coli , Microbiology 145 ( Pt 10 ) ( 1999 ) 2903e2912 . 
[ 30 ] P.A. Cotter , S.B. Melville , J.A. Albrecht , R.P. Gunsalus , Aerobic regulation of cytochrome d oxidase ( cydAB ) operon expression in Escherichia coli : roles of Fnr and ArcA in repression and activation , Mol . 
Microbiol . 
25 ( 1997 ) 605e615 . 
[ 31 ] P.D. Scheu , J. Witan , M. Rauschmeier , S. Graf , Y.F. Liao , A. Ebert-Jung , T. Basche , W. Erker , G. Unden , CitA/CitB two-component system regulating citrate fermentation in Escherichia coli and its relation to the DcuS/DcuR system in vivo , J. Bacteriol . 
194 ( 2012 ) 636e645 . 
[ 32 ] X. Liu , P. De Wulf , Probing the ArcA-P modulon of Escherichia coli by whole genome transcriptional analysis and sequence recognition proﬁling , J. Biol . 
Chem . 
279 ( 2004 ) 12588e12597 . 
[ 33 ] K.A. Datsenko , B.L. Wanner , One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in Escherichia coli K-12 using PCR products , Proc . 
Natl. Acad . 
Sci . 
U. S. A. 97 ( 2000 ) 6640e6645